
FRAGMENTS

OF

EXPERIENCE,


SIXTH BOOK OF THE

FAITH-PROMOTING SERIES.

Designed for the Instruction and Encouragement of Young Latter-day
Saints.


JUVENILE INSTRUCTOR OFFICE,

Salt Lake City,

1882.



PREFACE.

In issuing this, the Sixth Book of the FAITH-PROMOTING SERIES, we trust
that it will meet with the same kind reception that its predecessors
have. Perhaps no books that have ever been published in our Church have
become so popular in so short a time as the volumes of this Series
which have already been issued. They have tended towards supplying a
want which has long been felt in our community, and we feel assured
that they have done a great amount of good.

Young minds, as a rule, are not attracted by those publications which
treat specially upon doctrine. They are usually too profound for young
people to grasp and fully comprehend the ideas that are contained
in them. To the person with fully matured mind and well-developed
reasoning faculties they may appear ever so simple, and even
fascinating, but to most young people they are uninteresting, to some
positively distasteful. And yet there is scarcely a child but can be
taught principle in the form of narrative, wherein the application
is made for him in scenes from real life, and appreciate it. There
is no more sure way of instilling into the mind of a child faith in
God and in the work which He has established upon the earth than by
illustrating it with incidents from actual experience. The lesson, too,
is likely to be all the more effective in the persons whose lives are
held up for examples are those with whom the child is acquainted and in
whom he has confidence. The lives of many of the Elders of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints abound in incidents which, if
written and published, would tend to inspire those who might read them
with faith in God and a spirit of emulation. We hope a more general
interest may soon be felt throughout our Church in writing up such
incidents. That the host of children now growing up in the valleys of
the mountains appreciate and are ready to profit by their perusal there
can be no doubt.

The FRAGMENTS OF EXPERIENCE herein contained are collected at random,
but many valuable lessons may be drawn from the incidents narrated, and
we trust that the seed which they may sow in the hearts of those who
peruse them will be productive of a rich yield of fruit in the kingdom
of our Father.

THE PUBLISHER.



CONTENTS.

HELP PROM THE LORD.

Mission to Illinois when a Boy--Attempt of a Deacon to Put me to
Shame--Open my Bible to the Passage Required--Prove our Position
Correct from the Scriptures--Befriended by an Infidel--Preachers
Assault on the "Frogs"--The "Frog" Replies.

EARLY EXPERIENCE OF A LATTER-DAY SAINT.

Hear the Gospel by Chance--Compunction at Speaking Lightly of
the Prophet--Join the Church--A New Suit of Clothes--Opposed by
Relatives--My Old Friend, the Bible--A Dream--Required to Renounce
"Mormonism" or Leave the House--My Relatives Refuse to Speak to
me--They Pawn my Clothes--I Recover Them--Violence Used--My Clothes
Torn--My Mother's Death--My Brothers Quarrel, and call upon me to
Settle their Difficulties--My Brother Sick--Healed in Answer to my
Prayer.

DISOBEDIENCE TO COUNSEL.

Driven from my Property by the Mob--Desire to Return and Recover some
of it--Counseled by the Church Authorities not to Go--Persist in
Going--Visit a Friendly Family--Amiable Intention of my Debtors--Meet
two of Them They Threaten my Life--Despair of Getting Anything and Try
to Start Home--Beaten over the Head with a Pole--Barely Escape with my
Life--Ashamed to have my Friends Know It--The Lesson I Learned.

LORENZO DOW YOUNG'S NARRATIVE.

CHAPTER I.

My Mother's Promise--Chased by Wolves--A Remarkable Dream--Thrown from
a Horse--Providentially Saved--Religious Revival--Preachers Try in
vain to Convert me--Ridiculed for not Playing at Cards--Read Infidel
Works--Their Effect--A Vision.

CHAPTER II.

Marriage--A Vision of Other Worlds--My Reluctance at Returning to
a Mortal Existence--A Promise with Conditions--I Exhort Others to
Faithfulness.

CHAPTER III.

I Take to Preaching--Make Many Converts--Refuse to Baptize
Them--They are Baptized by a Campbellite Preacher--Urged to Join the
Campbellites--Refuse, and the Devil Tempts me--I Grieve the Spirit,
but Regain it Through Fasting and Prayer--Hear the Gospel--Visit from
Elder Gifford--He is Threatened with Tar and Feathers--My Brother and I
Defend Him.

CHAPTER IV.

Converted--Start for Missouri--Called to Preach "Mormonism" without
being Baptized--Join the Church--Voyage to Pittsburg--Preach the
Gospel and Establish a Branch--Experience as a Trunk-maker--Mission
to New York--Speak in Tongues--Effects of Preaching Counteracted by
Lies--Second Voyage Down the Ohio--Providential Delay.

CHAPTER V.

Removal to Kirtland--Work upon the Temple--A Lesson--
Sickness--Pronounced Incurable by Doctors--Healed in Answer to
Prayer--Cured of Lameness--Removal to Missouri--Commencement of
Hostilities--Surrounded by a Mob--Face Death--Rescued.

CHAPTER VI.

Warned to Leave the Country or Renounce "Mormonism"--Wife and Children
Threatened--A Boy's Pluck--Forced to Flee for our Lives--Property
Confiscated--Battle of Crooked River--Providentially Saved--Far West
Besieged--Escape to Iowa--Pursued--Providential Snow Storm.

AN INSTANCE OF DIVINE INTERPOSITION.

Visit to Scotland--Meet Old Friends--Return to Liverpool--About to go
by Steamer to Bristol--A Voice Warns me not to Go--Turn Back--Short of
Money--Means Providentially Provided--Journey to Portsmouth--Sequel to
the Warning--The Steamer Wrecked.

MY LAST MISSION TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.

CHAPTER I.

Elders Called Home from the Sandwich Islands--Native Elders Left to
Preside--Gibson's Arrival in Salt Lake--Joins the Church--Asks for a
Mission to the Sandwich Islands--His Deep-laid Scheme--Leading Astray
the Hawaiian Saints--Five Elders Sent to Investigate--Arrival at the
Sandwich Islands--Attempt to go Ashore in a Boat--Capsized in the
Surf--Elder Lorenzo Snow Lost--After a Long Search, Found Under the
Boat--Efforts to Resuscitate Him--Restored to Life One Hour After Being
Drowned.

CHAPTER II.

Journey to Lanai--Meet Mr. Gibson--Reverence of Natives for Him--His
Speech and Assumption--Elder Joseph F. Smith's Reply--Elder Snow's
Prophecy--Mr. Gibson Cut Off the Church--Elder Snow's Prophecy
Fulfilled--Advised to Select a New Gathering Place--A Vision--Suitable
Place Pointed Out.

A PROPHECY FULFILLED.

Called on a Mission to the Sandwich Islands--Journey by the
Southern Route--A Prophecy--Fear After Uttering It--Residence
in Honolulu--Political and Religious Conflict--The Kingdom in
Jeopardy--Dissatisfaction Among the People--Letter to the King
Favorably Considered--A Dream--A Prince sent by the King to Ask Counsel
of Latter-day Saint Elders--Advice Accepted, and the Kingdom Saved--The
Dream and Prophecy Fulfilled Together.

SPECIAL PROVIDENCES.

Circumstances under which the Early Temples were Built--How the
Workmen were Encouraged--Arrival of Brother L---- in Nauvoo--His
Willingness to Work without Pay--His Extreme Want--Appeals to
God for Help--Money Miraculously Provided--Prayer for Food
Answered--Providential Finding of a Pair of Shoes on the Plains--A
Crippled Shoulder Restored while Defending the Character of Joseph
Smith.

INCIDENTS ON THE PLAINS.

CHAPTER I.

Army Sent to Utah--Missionaries Called Home--Large Number Assembled
at Florence--Dangers of Trip--Council to Decide Upon Course of
Action--Fortunate Fog--Providential Storm.

CHAPTER II.

Apostates Met--The Chaplain Separates From the Company to Meet some
Apostates--An Adventurous Trip--Discharged Government Teamsters
Indignant at "Mormons"--Plot to Steal the Chaplain's Horse--Advice to
the Apostates to Look to Their Own Safety--Mr. Stout's Compassion for
the Hatchet-faced Missourian--How His Confidence was Rewarded--Meet
Captain Hatch--News of Buchanan's Amnesty Proclamation--Evade the Army
and Reach the Valley in Safety.



HELP FROM THE LORD

By C.

MISSION IN ILLINOIS WHEN A BOY--ATTEMPT OF A DEACON TO PUT ME TO
SHAME--OPEN MY BIBLE TO THE PASSAGE REQUIRED--PROVE OUR POSITION
CORRECT FROM THE SCRIPTURES--BEFRIENDED BY AN INFIDEL--PREACHER'S
ASSAULT ON THE "FROGS"--THE "FROG" REPLIES.

In the year 1845, I was appointed on a mission from Nauvoo, to labor
about Cass County, Illinois, in company with Theodore Curtis.

After traveling together we concluded to separate, and I continued
alone, preaching wherever an opportunity presented itself.

One evening I was approaching a little town called Virginia, foot-sore
and weary, having been frequently denied food.

I retired, as was my wont particularly when so impressed, for prayer,
and for God to soften the hearts of those I might meet, to give me
shelter, food and rest, and finally to open up my way.

Towards evening I found a number of persons congregated at the country
store. I saluted them with "Good-evening," and inquired the opportunity
of getting a chance to preach in that place.

I carried the badge of a "Mormon" preacher in my hand, namely, a small
round valise, containing a shirt, change of socks, Bible and hymn book.
I was soon assured by one or two that there was no earthly show for a
"Mormon" preacher to be heard in that place.

I replied, "I would like to preach in that nice, newly-finished
meeting-house just opposite." A man spoke up quite authoritatively, and
said that no "Mormon" should preach in that house, which had just been
dedicated--I think for Presbyterian worship.

They termed this man the deacon. This produced considerable talk,
for many of the crowd were of what is termed the liberal or infidel
persuasion, so much so that the deacon was overwhelmed by argument,
shame and reproach, for refusing a boy like me a chance to preach.

To cover his shame and to nonplus me, he remarked, "I have heard say
that your preachers are pretty apt with the scriptures, and can produce
almost any doctrine you like from the Bible." I replied that the men
were, but that I was but a boy; yet I thought I knew a little of the
scriptures.

He remarked "Your people believe in laying hands on the sick; don't
you?"

I answered that we did, and because Christ had said in His remarkable
commission to His apostles, that this was one of the signs following,
quoting Mark xvi, 15-18. I also quoted James v., 14.

"Yes, yes;" says he, "that is all very good, but that says only once,
and your Elders sometimes lay hands twice in succession on the same
person. Whoever heard of Jesus or the apostles doing anything like
that?" He then cited an instance where, as he said, Joseph Smith had
done this in administering to a sick woman.

The good-natured excitement was intense. The deacon thought I was
overwhelmed, and proposed that if I could prove a similar transaction
from the scriptures, I might preach in that house that very night.

Eagerness now seized the men, and the deacon chuckled over his presumed
victory, and boasted of his acquaintance with the "Blessed Word."

I unbuckled my valise, drew forth my little Bible, and opened it
intuitively to this passage in Mark viii., 22-25: "And he cometh to
Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and besought him to
touch him. And he took the blind man by the hand, * * * and put his
hands upon him, and asked him if he saw aught. And he looked up, and
said, I see men as trees, walking. After that he put his hands _again_
upon his eyes, and made him look up: and he was restored, and saw every
man clearly."

The reading of this scripture; the sudden finding of it, for I was led
to it as clearly as a man leads his horse to the water; its aptness and
conclusiveness, accompanied by the jeers of the infidel portion of the
crowd, mortified the deacon--he was discomfited.

I remarked that I would, according to the deacon's terms, preach in the
church that evening, provided some one would find candles. The candles
were instantly offered, and accordingly, I preached with power and the
demonstration of the Spirit.

After the close of the services, I found a resting place with one of
the most avowed infidels of the neighborhood, who had listened to the
talk between the deacon and myself, and who particularly enjoyed the
good man's discomfiture. By his persuasion I staid some time in the
neighborhood, occupying occasionally the school-house.

He even proffered me some land to build me a house if I would stay,
preach and teach school; but my mind was bent on returning to Nauvoo.

But one evening, when I had been preaching my intended farewell
sermon in the closely-packed school-house, and just at its close, a
person arose and said that, God willing, he would deliver a discourse
there the next Sunday, and expose the "Mormon" delusion, giving his
announcement all the force and emphasis possible.

My friends gathered at my place of stopping, and, joining with my host,
prevailed upon me to stay. The word was given out that I had gone to
Nauvoo.

At the time appointed a great crowd had convened--time, early
candle-light.

I arrived late, purposely. My friend and I took seats near the door.

The preacher, after preliminaries, opened the Bible, and, for his text,
read the 13th and 14th verses of the 16th chapter of Revelations.

After dilating upon the swampy nature of the soil contiguous to Nauvoo,
styling it a good place for frogs, and facetiously comparing it to the
"mouth of the dragon," he came down heavily on the "false prophet," the
miracles, etc. It was a most scathing rebuke on "Mormonism."

His final peroration was on the habits of the frogs, which, while no
footsteps were heard, croaked and croaked, but at the first sound of
an approaching footstep, dodged their heads beneath the water. "So,"
said he, at the same time rising to the sublime hight of his oratory,
"where, oh where is the frog that croaked here a day or two ago? Gone
to that slough of iniquity, Nauvoo, the seat of the dragon and the
false prophet. Why has he fled? Because he heard the footsteps of your
true shepherd." After much interlarding, he dismissed by prayer.

I immediately arose and said that the frog was there yet, and would
croak once more, naming the time.

Shouts from the audience named that same evening as the time, and the
reverend preacher, amid jeers, cheers and cries of, "Give the boy a
chance!" made for the one door.

My friend was alive to the emergency, and I, nothing loth, opened a
fusilade from I. Timothy, 4th chapter, while the preacher was hemmed in
by the crowd, and my friend with his back to the door.

After an exhaustive testimony of the work, we all departed, some
pleased, some chagrined.

In both of the instances here narrated, the opening of the Bible to the
apt and confirmatory passages, were then to my mind clearly the answer
to prayer, for if ever previously read they had escaped my memory.

How much good I did on that mission, I cannot guess. One thing I do
know, as a general rule not many are truly converted by the clamor of
crowds, or the frenzy of debates.

My object in giving these two instances is to incite my young brethren
to a study of the scriptures, the necessity of earnest secret prayer,
and confidence in the promise that at the hour and time God will help
them, and bring them off victoriously.

Great care must be taken to give God the glory in your after prayer,
"for no flesh can glory in his sight."

Enconiums should produce humility, lest we be puffed up, and, in an
after time, display our complete nothingness.



EARLY EXPERIENCE OF A LATTER-DAY SAINT.

HEAR THE GOSPEL BY CHANCE--COMPUNCTION AT SPEAKING LIGHTLY OF
THE PROPHET--JOIN THE CHURCH--A NEW SUIT OF CLOTHES--OPPOSED BY
RELATIVES--MY OLD FRIEND, THE BIBLE--A DREAM--REQUIRED TO RENOUNCE
"MORMONISM" OR LEAVE THE HOUSE--MY RELATIVES REFUSE TO SPEAK TO
ME--THEY PAWN MY CLOTHES--I RECOVER THEM--VIOLENCE USED--MY CLOTHES
TORN--MY MOTHER'S DEATH--MY BROTHERS QUARREL AND CALL UPON ME TO SETTLE
THEIR DIFFICULTIES--MY BROTHER SICK--HEALED IN ANSWER TO MY PRAYER.

The substance of the following little sketch was told to the writer by
the subject of it, who is an Elder in the Church, and lives in Salt
Lake City. His name is Robert P--k. We give it in words as near his own
as we can remember.

I was born and reared in the city of Glasgow, Scotland. I passed my
boyhood without thinking much on religious matters, till I was about
eighteen years of age. At this period of my life I was walking along
what is called the Green, a kind of public park, when my attention was
attracted by some men discussing publicly the principles of religion.
One of them was a Baptist, and I could see that he had the best of the
argument, baptism by immersion being a Bible doctrine. This was on
Sunday evening.

After listening to the discussion for some time, I was attracted to a
place where another man was preaching. This one proved to be an Elder
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I was so struck with the principles he advanced, that I drank down
greedily every word he spoke, and on hearing him tell where the
meeting-house of the Latter-day Saints was situated, I went there. I
was, however, too bashful to go inside, but I walked back and forth
around the building, listening and catching whatever words I could.

I was out later than usual that night, and when I got home I was
questioned as to the cause of my absence, by my mother (my father had
been dead many years) and brothers. I said I had been to hear the
"Mormons."

"Who are the Mormons?"

"Why, the followers of Joe Smith," said I. But I had no sooner said
this than a sharp pang shot through me, and I felt condemned for
speaking thus irreverently of the prophet. I did it because I thought
it would excuse me in the eyes of my relatives. I knew I had done
wrong, for, young as I was, I felt deeply impressed with the idea
that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. As it was, I was severely
reprimanded for staying out so late.

Shortly after this I went to meeting and heard Elder John Taylor speak
on the setting up of the kingdom of God in the latter days, which did a
great deal towards convincing me that the Lord had revealed the gospel
in this age. After attending meeting for some time, I was finally
baptized into the Church, and was filled with joy because I knew that I
was indeed a member of the true Church of Christ.

Knowing that if my mother and four brothers discovered that I had
joined the Church I would have no peace at home, I kept the matter
secret from them. I was but an apprentice and only earning the small
sum of three shillings a week (equal to seventy-five cents) and was,
therefore, somewhat dependent on my relatives.

I was about to get my wages raised a shilling a week, and my eldest
brother, Hugh, proposed that he should get me a suit of clothes, and I
pay this shilling a week until the suit was paid for, so that I might
go to church with the rest of the family.

I was glad to exchange, on Sundays, my old, patched, shabby working
suit for some respectable clothing, and it was agreed to.

On the following Sunday morning I went to meeting as usual, and was
complimented by the President of the Branch on my improved personal
appearance. When I got home in the evening the first question asked of
me was,

"Where have you been?"

"I have been to meeting."

"What meeting?"

"I have been to hear the Latter-day Saints."

At this there was a perfect storm about my ears. I went and got the old
family Bible, and laid down the "law and the testimony."

In answer to all they would say, I quoted and read from the Bible. I
explained the principles of the gospel of Jesus, and the strongest
argument any of them used was in each picking up his hat and walking
out.

On the following day (Monday) I felt somewhat timid about going home
in the evening, for I had dreamed on the Sunday night that my brothers
were plotting to turn me out of the house.

However, home I went, and just as I approached the door I heard their
voices in conversation, and they were saying they would ask me which
I would choose, to leave "Mormonism" or the house; and John, who was
always more rabid and unkind than the rest, said he would not even let
me eat my supper until I had decided what I should do.

I walked boldly in, sat down, and commenced eating supper. They sat
silent for a short time, when finally Hugh put the question to me as to
whether I would renounce "Mormonism," for if I did not I would have to
leave the house.

I again brought down my old friend, the family Bible, and said:
"Hugh, if you will prove to me from that sacred book that I am wrong
in adhering to 'Mormonism,' or rather the gospel of Christ, I will
renounce it; and if I show you that you are wrong in adhering to Church
of Scotland, then you should leave that."

I then talked upon the scriptures and the principles of the gospel, and
they could bring forward no reasonable objections to what I advanced.

Hugh rose to his feet and said: "If father had been alive he would have
kicked you out of the house."

I answered: "Father is now rejoicing because of my having embraced the
gospel of Jesus."

At this rejoinder the anger of my brothers increased; and Hugh used his
old argument of picking up his hat and walking out.

I was induced to make this remark in relation to my father, because on
the previous Sunday I had heard the doctrine of baptism and salvation
for the dead preached by Elder John Lyon. While listening to him I was
so filled with joy and gratitude at the prospect of doing something
towards the salvation of my father, who had died without a knowledge of
the gospel, that the tears chased each other down my face like rain. It
was the first time I had heard the principles by which the grand chain
which shall link the great human family together will be formed.

Seeing that threats and abuse availed nothing, making no impression
upon me, my mother and brothers took another course: they would not
speak to me.

Although I lived in the same house and ate at the same table with them,
they uttered not a word to me, and would not answer me when I spoke to
them.

Even my mother's heart seemed entirely hardened towards me, and it
often cut me keenly when she would meet me on the street and pass
without speaking.

Notwithstanding all this I rejoiced in the gospel exceedingly, feeling
that the cause of God was more dear to me than my nearest relatives.

On the next Sunday I went to the drawer where my best suit was usually
kept, and discovered that it was gone. They had not even left me a
clean shirt. Nothing daunted, however, I buttoned up my shabby, old,
every-day coat, and marched off to meeting, feeling that I could
worship God just as fervently and acceptably in an old suit as in a new
one.

Instead of handing over my wages to my mother as I usually did, I kept
them every week, and announced at home my intention of doing so until
my clothes were returned to me, thinking this would induce them to give
them up.

However, I happened to come home one day at an unusual time, and in
turning over some articles to get something I wanted, I came upon a
ticket which at once explained where my clothes had gone. They had been
pawned.

That this term may be understood, it may be well to say that they were
deposited in a place where money is loaned on goods, and when the
money is returned, with an additional sum as interest, the goods are
delivered back to the owner.

I took this ticket, and with my wages which I had saved, and a little
money which I had borrowed, I went to the pawnbroker's and got my
clothes, and left them, for safe keeping, at the house of a brother in
the Church.

I dressed up on the following Sunday and presented myself at home at
dinner time, when my brothers manifested no small astonishment and a
little shame on seeing that I had discovered their trick.

I had forgotten to say that on several occasions after I had dressed
for meeting, my brothers would attempt to stop me from going, by main
force, and several times in their efforts to keep me in, had torn the
breast out of my shirt, but I invariably succeeded in getting out, and
when my shirt was torn I would button up my coat and go to meeting.

Matters went on in this way for over two years, during which time I
had been frequently told to leave the house and never enter it again.
I paid no attention to this. On being told to go on one occasion,
however, I said the next time I was ordered off I would go.

Not long afterwards my mother told me to leave the house forever, and I
announced my intention of doing so on the Sunday following.

When Saturday came I proceeded to tie up my clothes in a bundle. No
sooner did they see me doing this than they seized my clothing, and
tore up my shirts and several other articles.

On former occasions when I had been thus abused, it was my custom to
resist, but this time this disposition had departed; my heart was full;
I pitied them for their blindness, and I felt like weeping tears of
sorrow.

I made my way out of the house as best I could, with my wardrobe
reduced to a single pair of pants, besides the clothes I wore at the
time. As I was leaving I told them that the course they had taken
towards me would bring them no good. My mind was filled with grief and
I slept none that night.

Six weeks after this my mother burst a blood vessel, from the effect
of which she never recovered, being ill from that time till her death,
which occurred a year afterwards. This broke up the family.

Hugh married, and my three other brothers, John, George and William
went to live with him. Some time afterwards John came to me and told me
they had quarrelled, and he wished me to go and settle matters between
the brothers, which I did, and the result was that John lived apart
from the others.

William, who was the most peaceable and amiable of my brothers, was
taken very ill, and one evening I was impressed to go and see him. I
found all the members of the family gathered around him, as he was not
expected to live through the night.

After everybody had left the room but myself, he said to me, "Robert,
do you believe I shall die to-night?"

I said: "No, I do not."

"I ask you because the others are hypocrites, for when I ask whether
they think I will die, they say, 'No, you will live,' and then I hear
them in the adjoining room arranging how they will dress me when I am
dead."

He fell asleep, and I laid hands upon him and administered to him in
the name of Jesus Christ, and when he awoke he was much better, and he
lived for four months after this.

This is a little of my first experience as a Latter-day Saint. Nearly
every true disciple of Jesus has passed through circumstances that are
instructive, although trying at the time they occur, and sometimes the
relating of such things has a good effect, however simple the narrative
may be.



DISOBEDIENCE TO COUNSEL.

BY ANSON CALL.

DRIVEN FROM MY PROPERTY BY THE MOB--DESIRE TO RETURN AND RECOVER SOME
OF IT--COUNSELED BY THE CHURCH AUTHORITIES NOT TO GO--PERSIST IN
GOING--VISIT A FRIENDLY FAMILY--AMIABLE INTENTION OF MY DEBTORS--MEET
TWO OF THEM--THEY THREATEN MY LIFE--DESPAIR OF GETTING ANYTHING AND TRY
TO START HOME--BEATEN OVER THE HEAD WITH A POLE--BARELY ESCAPE WITH MY
LIFE--ASHAMED TO HAVE MY FRIENDS KNOW IT--THE LESSON I LEARNED.

To some persons it may appear strange that the Elders of the Church
in their addresses to the Saints, should so frequently dwell upon the
necessity of constant obedience to counsel. But although this may seem
strange, still the experience of both the Elders and the Saints goes to
prove that "to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the
fat of rams."

The Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants
contain many instances of the blessings that have attended obedience,
and the serious consequences that have followed disobedience.

I will not, however, refer to any one of these divine books; but
will give my readers an instance of the consequence of disobedience
which occurred to me in my early experience in the Church, in the
commencement of the year 1839.

At that time I was living with the Saints in Far West, though I owned
property, which I had been driven from, at the Three Forks of Grand
River, distant from Far West about thirty miles.

As I wished to learn whether I could dispose of this property or not, I
asked Father Joseph Smith and President Brigham Young for counsel about
visiting Grand River for this purpose. They counselled me not to go;
but to stay at home.

I had been driven from my property by the mob that came against the
Saints, and as the Saints were obliged to leave the State I desired
to go with them to Illinois. But I did not want to be burdensome to
others. If I could sell my property on Grand River I would not be, so I
concluded that there could not be much harm in my going to Grand River,
and I set out.

How I succeeded the following extract from my journal will show.

December 31, 1838, being anxious to obtain means to make a team, that
I might be able to go with the Saints, I this morning mounted the only
horse I had left, and started for the Three Forks of Grand River.

I arrived at my farm on new year's day, and learned that a man by the
name of George Washington O'Niel had it in his possession.

I passed on two miles further to a family by the name of Day, who had
come in from the Eastern States a few weeks before I was driven away.
This family had taken no part with the mob. I found the lady at home,
and received from her a history of my property. She informed me that
O'Niel and Culp, Missouri mobbers, had said that if ever I came to the
place they would kill me; and that one Henderson and others would help
them.

When on my farm I had sold store goods to a number of the citizens,
who were to pay me for them at Christmas. She said she had heard many
of them say that if I came there, they would pay me just as "Mormons"
should be paid.

Just at this time O'Niel and Culp came into the house. They demanded
of me my reasons for being there. I told them that I was attending to
my business. They said I had no business there, and if I got away from
there I would be smart.

I replied that I was white man, that it was time enough to be afraid
when I saw danger, and that I should go when I pleased.

They told me that they would as soon kill me as a dog, and that there
would be no more notice taken of my death than if a dog were killed.
This I very well understood.

They then told me that they supposed I had come to get my property.

I informed them I had; to which they replied that there was no property
for me.

After repeated threatenings I became convinced that it was in vain
to think of obtaining anything, and started for my horse, which was
hitched at the yard fence about five rods from the door.

They followed me. O'Niel picked up the end of a hoop pole which Mr.
Day had left there, he having been hooping a barrel. With this pole he
struck me a blow upon the head, which nearly brought me to the ground.
I looked around for a club with which to defend myself, but there was
none in sight. He continued striking me, and would doubtless have
killed me, had it not been for a very thick woolen cap on my head.

Mrs. Day threw open the door and cried murder. I ran for the house to
get something, if possible, to defend myself with; but before I reached
the door, he struck me repeatedly, and gave me one blow over the eye,
the scar of which I carry to this day.

As soon as I got into the house I clutched the fire shovel. At that
moment Mrs. Day closed the door, so that I could not get out nor O'Niel
in. He and Culp then passed the window, on which Mrs. Day supposed they
had started for their guns, so I mounted my horse and rode for Far West
as fast as I could.

My head and face soon commenced swelling. On my way home I washed
myself, and resolved not to inform any one what had happened, as Father
Smith and President Young had both told me not to go.

I reached home about eleven o'clock at night, and went to bed without
making a light. In the morning I arose, and just as soon as I got out
of bed, I fell upon the floor. My wife was alarmed and screamed. I told
her what had happened; but told her to keep the matter from my family.
Father Smith, however, soon heard of the occurrence, and came to see
me. He hoped, he said, that the lesson would do me good, and that he
was glad that I was not quite killed.

Had I obeyed the words "do not go, but stay at home," I should not have
fallen into this trouble. May you who read this be wise, and in this
particular, profit by my experience.



LORENZO DOW YOUNG'S NARRATIVE.

CHAPTER I.

MY MOTHER'S PROMISE--CHASED BY WOLVES--A REMARKABLE DREAM--THROWN FROM
A HORSE--PROVIDENTIALLY SAVED--RELIGIOUS REVIVAL--PREACHERS TRY IN
VAIN TO CONVERT ME--RIDICULED FOR NOT PLAYING AT CARDS--READ INFIDEL
WORKS--THEIR EFFECT--A VISION.

I was born October 19th, 1807, in the town of Smyrna, Chenango County,
New York.

My mother was afflicted many years with consumption. I remember her
as a fervent, praying woman. She used, frequently, to call me to her
bedside and counsel me to be a good man, that the Lord might bless my
future life. On one occasion, she told me that if I would not neglect
to pray to my Heavenly Father, He would send a guardian angel to
protect me in the dangers to which I might be exposed.

She had so trained me to trust in God, that, even in my early youth, I
seemed capable of grasping, in my faith, the prophetic promise she had
made. It sank deep into my heart, and ever since has been an anchor of
hope in the difficulties and dangers to which I have been exposed.

This pious, faithful, friend and mother, drooped and died on the 11th
of June, 1814.

Soon after her death, my father broke up housekeeping, and I was sent
about sixty miles to live with my brother-in-law, John P. Green, near
Cayuga Bridge.

It was a marshy, malarious country, and I was taken very sick with
fever and ague, with which I suffered severely. In the fall of 1815,
we removed to Tyrone, Schuyler County. In the meantime, my father had
taken up some land on which to make a home, about six miles from where
Mr. Green lived. This country, at that time, was new, and there was
nothing but a dense forest between Mr. Green's house and my father's.
The wolves were very numerous in this forest. At one time, several of
them chased me to Mr. Green's house, and I seemed to barely escape with
my life.

During the winter of 1815-16, in company with my brothers, Joseph,
Phinehas and Brigham, I worked for my father and assisted him to clear
off some land.

In the autumn of 1816, when about nine years old, I had a peculiar
dream. I thought I stood in an open, clear space of ground, and saw a
plain, fine road, leading, at an angle of 45 degrees, into the air, as
far as I could see. I heard a noise like a carriage in rapid motion, at
what seemed the upper end of the road. In a moment it came in sight.
It was drawn by a pair of beautiful, white horses. The carriage and
harness appeared brilliant with gold. The horses traveled with the
speed of the wind. It was made manifest to me that the Savior was in
the carriage, and that it was driven by His servant. The carriage
stopped near me, and the Savior inquired where my brother Brigham was.
After informing Him, He further inquired about my other brothers, and
our father. After I had answered His inquiries, He stated that He
wanted us all, but He especially wanted my brother Brigham. The team
then turned right about, and returned on the road it had come.

I awoke at once, and slept no more that night. I felt frightened,
and supposed we were all going to die. I saw no other solution to
the dream. It was a shadowing of our future which I was then in no
condition to discern.

In the morning I told my father the dream, and my fears that we were
going to die. He comforted me with the assurance that he did not think
my interpretation was correct.

In the winter of 1817-18, I went to live with my brother-in-law, James
Little, in the town of Aurelius, Cayuga County, New York. I remained
there about five years, learning the business of a gardener and fruit
raiser.

In the summer of my twelfth year, I was placed upon a race horse by
Mr. Little, and sent on an errand. The animal was too spirited for a
boy of my age to safely ride. It became frightened and unmanageable.
It turned so rapidly around that I was thrown out of the saddle. As I
fell my bare foot slipped through the iron stirrup, where I hung with
my head just touching the ground. With my left hand, I still grasped
the bridle rein, on that side, firmly. The horse endeavored to kick me,
but, fortunately, did not succeed on account of my being too close to
him. My hold on the bridle rein prevented the animal from running away
and caused him to whirl around almost in a circle.

In danger we often think with great rapidity. I comprehended my
situation in a moment, and, at first, could see no way of escape from
having my brains dashed out. But, as I hung, I was suddenly impressed
to get hold of the stirrup with my right hand, and make an effort to
raise myself up, so as to get my foot loose from it. By a great effort
I succeeded in drawing myself up, and slipping the stirrup over my
foot. I then let go all hold and fell to the ground.

The horse went at full speed for home and his stable. I got up and was
not much hurt.

The promise my mother made me flashed into my mind, and I felt thankful
to the Lord that I had been preserved from serious harm by a kind
providence.

In the winter of 1819-20, I left Aurelius and went about twenty miles
to Hector, Schuyler County. A Methodist revival occurred in that town,
and religious excitement ran so high that it became fashionable to make
a profession of religion.

So far as I knew, every young person in the neighborhood but myself
professed to receive "a saving change of heart" before the close of the
revival.

As was usual during such periods of religious excitement, meetings were
held nightly. In these meetings it was the custom to request those who
were "seeking religion," to come forward to some seat reserved for the
purpose, to be prayed for.

I was somewhat affected by the intense religious feeling. One evening,
I attended a meeting presided over by Elder Gilmore, the leading
minister. Two or three other preachers were also present. The usual
invitation was given for penitents to come forward to the "anxious
seat."

Some time was spent in prayer, when all who had come forward, except
myself, professed to have a "change of heart." The meeting was closed,
and Elder Gilmore proposed that those who were willing to do so, should
retire to a private house with me, and continue in prayer till I was
converted.

As proposed, we retired to a neighboring house, where the praying
continued until two o'clock in the morning.

Elder Gilmore then asked me if I had not received a "change of heart."

I replied that I had not realized any "change."

After so much fruitless labor, they were evidently disposed to give me
up as a reprobate. Elder Gilmore told me that I had sinned away the day
of grace, and my damnation was sure. He asserted that he would never
offer another prayer for me.

Although religious in my nature, even at that early age, sectarian
religion seemed empty and void.

The following morning, I left the scene of this religious excitement
in Hector and returned to Cayuga County, about three miles from
Auburn. There I went to work for Mr. Monroe, to learn the trade of a
blacksmith. He carried on considerable business, and employed a number
of young men and apprentices.

One evening, Mr. Monroe and the workmen gathered around the center
table, in the sitting room, to while away the evening in a game of
cards. Mr. Monroe invited me to participate.

My father had counseled me never to play a game of cards. "Not," said
he, "that there is any particular harm in playing a game of cards, but
card-playing has a tendency to lead those who follow it into other
vices."

I determined, at the time, to keep his counsel should it cost me my
situation. Mr. Monroe did not appear disposed to receive any apology
for not accepting his invitation. I arose, took a Bible that was near
me, and read during the evening while the remainder of the company
played cards.

The most of Mr. Monroe's workmen were inclined to infidelity, and the
course I took that evening, afterwards brought upon me much annoyance
and ridicule.

Although infidel in principle, Mr. Monroe was kind to those around him,
and manifested that kindness to me as well as others. He placed in
my hands several infidel books. Among them, I recollect the writings
of Voltaire and Thomas Payne. My experience at this time, taught me
that skeptical works cannot be read without leaving their impression
on the mind. A continuation of reading them must, eventually, lead to
confirmed infidelity.

The teachings of my pious parents had given me considerable faith in
God, and I enjoyed some of His Spirit. It has since been evident to me,
that the reading of those infidel books stirred up an antagonism in me
between the Spirit of truth and the spirit of skepticism. The struggle
between them, in my bosom, continued about a year, and was a source of
great affliction to me. The Lord, through His Spirit, was trying to
save me from error and darkness.

I would advise all my young friends, and especially those who have had
the testimony of the Spirit of truth, to never, by any act of theirs,
invite the spirit of infidelity into their hearts, lest they fall away
into darkness, and go down to death.

I remained with Mr. Monroe nearly two years. I injured myself lifting a
log, and it was evident that I could not again work at the blacksmith
business for some time. For this reason I left Mr. Monroe, and went to
visit Mr. J. P. Green, who lived in Watertown, about one hundred miles
from Auburn, in Jefferson County.

For sometime my health continued poor. One day I lay on a bed to rest
where I could see the family in their ordinary occupations. All at
once I heard the most beautiful music. I soon discovered from whence
it came. Standing side by side, on the foot board of the beadstead on
which I lay, were two beautiful, seraph-like beings, about the size
of children seven or eight years old. They were dressed in white, and
appeared surpassingly pure and heavenly. I felt certain that I was
fully awake, and these juvenile personages were realistic to me. With
their disappearance the music ceased. I turned and asked two of my
sisters, who were in the room, if they had not heard the music. I was
much surprised to learn that they had heard nothing.



CHAPTER II

MARRIAGE--A VISION OF OTHER WORLDS--MY RELUCTANCE AT RETURNING TO
A MORTAL EXISTENCE--A PROMISE WITH CONDITIONS--I EXHORT OTHERS TO
FAITHFULNESS.

While at Watertown, I married, and afterwards removed to Mendon, Monroe
County. At this place I had a remarkable dream or vision. I fancied
that I died. In a moment I was out of the body, and fully conscious
that I had made the change. At once, a heavenly messenger, or guide,
was by me. I thought and acted as naturally as I had done in the body,
and all my sensations seemed as complete without as with it. The
personage with me was dressed in the purest white. For a short time I
remained in the room where my body lay. My sister Fanny (who was living
with me when I had this dream) and my wife were weeping bitterly over my
death. I sympathized with them deeply in their sorrow, and desired to
comfort them. I realized that I was under the control of the man who
was by me. I begged of him the privilege of speaking to them, but he
said he could not grant it. My guide, for so I will call him, said "Now
let us go."

Space seemed annihilated. Apparently we went up, and almost instantly
were in another world. It was of such magnitude that I formed no
conception of its size. It was filled with innumerable hosts of beings,
who seemed as naturally human as those among whom I had lived. With
some I had been acquainted in the world I had just left. My guide
informed me that those I saw had not yet arrived at their final abiding
place. All kinds of people seemed mixed up promiscuously, as they are
in this world. Their surroundings and manner indicated that they were
in a state of expectation, and awaiting some event of considerable
moment to them.

As we went on from this place, my guide said, "I will now show you the
condition of the damned." Pointing with his hand, he said, "Look!"

I looked down a distance which appeared incomprehensible to me. I
gazed on a vast region filled with multitudes of beings. I could see
everything with the most minute distinctness. The multitude of people
I saw were miserable in the extreme. "These," said my guide, "are they
who have rejected the means of salvation, that were placed within their
reach, and have brought upon themselves the condemnation you behold."

The expression of the countenances of these sufferers was clear and
distinct. They indicated extreme remorse, sorrow and dejection. They
appeared conscious that none but themselves were to blame for their
forlorn condition.

This scene affected me much, and I could not refrain from weeping.

Again my guide said, "Now let us go."

In a moment we were at the gate of a beautiful city. A porter opened it
and we passed in. The city was grand and beautiful beyond anything that
I can describe. It was clothed in the purest light, brilliant but not
glaring or unpleasant.

The people, men and women, in their employments and surroundings,
seemed contented and happy. I knew those I met without being told who
they were. Jesus and the ancient apostles were there. I saw and spoke
with the apostle Paul.

My guide would not permit me to pause much by the way, but rather
hurried me on through this place to another still higher but connected
with it. It was still more beautiful and glorious than anything I had
before seen. To me its extent and magnificence were incomprehensible.

My guide pointed to a mansion which excelled everything else in
perfection and beauty. It was clothed with fire and intense light. It
appeared a fountain of light, throwing brilliant scintillations of
glory all around it, and I could conceive of no limit to which these
emanations extended. Said my guide, "That is where God resides." He
permitted me to enter this glorious city but a short distance. Without
speaking, he motioned that we would retrace our steps.

We were soon in the adjoining city. There I met my mother, and a sister
who died when six or seven years old. These I knew at sight without an
introduction.

After mingling with the pure and happy beings of this place a short
time, my guide said again, "Let us go."

We were soon through the gate by which we had entered the city. My
guide then said, "Now we will return."

I could distinctly see the world from which we had first come. It
appeared to be a vast distance below us. To me, it looked cloudy,
dreary and dark. I was filled with sad disappointment, I might say
horror, at the idea of returning there. I supposed I had come to stay
in that heavenly place, which I had so long desired to see; up to this
time, the thought had not occurred to me that I would be required to
return.

I plead with my guide to let me remain. He replied that I was permitted
to only visit these heavenly cities, for I had not filled my mission
in yonder world; therefore I must return and take my body. If I was
faithful to the grace of God which would be imparted to me, if I
would bear a faithful testimony to the inhabitants of the earth of a
sacrificed and risen Savior, and His atonement for man, in a little
time I should be permitted to return and remain.

These words gave me comfort and inspired my bosom with the principle
of faith. To me, these things were real. I felt that a great mission
had been given me, and I accepted it in my heart. The responsibility of
that mission has rested on me from that time until now.

We returned to my house. There I found my body, and it appeared to me
dressed for burial. It was with great reluctance that I took possession
of it to resume the ordinary avocations of life, and endeavor to fill
the important mission I had received. I awoke and found myself in my
bed. I lay and meditated the remainder of the night on what had been
shown me.

Call it a dream, or vision, or what I may, what I saw was as real to
every sense of my being as anything I have passed through. The memory
of it is clear and distinct with me to-day, after the lapse of fifty
years with its many changes.

From that time, although belonging to no church, the Spirit was with
me to testify to the sufferings and atonement of the Savior. As I had
opportunity, I continually exhorted the people, in public and private,
to exercise faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, to repent of their sins and
live a life of righteousness and good works.



CHAPTER III.

I TAKE TO PREACHING--MAKE MANY CONVERTS--REFUSE TO BAPTIZE
THEM--THEY ARE BAPTIZED BY A CAMPBELLITE PREACHER--URGED TO JOIN THE
CAMPBELLITES--REFUSE, AND THE DEVIL TEMPTS ME--I GRIEVE THE SPIRIT,
BUT REGAIN IT THROUGH FASTING AND PRAYER--HEAR THE GOSPEL--VISIT FROM
ELDER GIFFORD--HE IS THREATENED WITH TAR AND FEATHERS--MY BROTHER AND I
DEFEND HIM.

In the fall of 1828, I returned to Hector, Schuyler County, New York.
Quite a number of people lived there of the Campbellite faith. 'Squire
Chase, a prominent man in the neighborhood, who had been a preacher of
the sect, said that they were cold in religion and had not held any
meetings for several months. I had been there but a few days, when I
went with him about two miles to a Methodist meeting. This occurred in
the month of November.

Up to this time I had joined no church, although I had professed
religion, attended meetings, and preached when I had an opportunity.

On my return, I remarked to Mr. Chase, "Why cannot we have meetings in
our neighborhood as well as to go so far to them?"

He replied, "We are all dead there; we would have meetings but I do not
feel like preaching. But if you will do the preaching, I will appoint a
meeting."

He did so. The first two meetings but few attended. The third meeting
the house was crowded. Finally, meetings were held nearly every night
in the week, and were well attended. A reformation started among
the people, and there were quite a number of religious converts.
Campbellite principles had long prevailed in the neighborhood. The
converts desired baptism, as that was a prominent principle in the
Campbellite faith. Mr. Chase urged me to perform the ordinance. I
excused myself by telling him that I had never joined any religious
denomination, and did not feel authorized to administer it. I finally
utterly refused to do so. He then sent forty or fifty miles for Elder
Brown, a regular Campbellite preacher.

He came and baptized about sixty converts and organized a branch of the
Campbellite church out of the fruits of my labors. He quite exhausted
his persuasive powers to induce me to join the Campbellite church, to
take a circuit and go to preaching.

I told him I would not preach his doctrines. If I preached at all, I
should preach the whole Bible as I understood it.

He said I could do so, for he did not think I would preach anything
wrong.

A spirit worked with me to do all the good I could, but not to join any
religious denomination. It prevailed within me against all temptation
this time. Perhaps the guardian angel, promised by my mother, watched
over my spiritual as well as temporal welfare.

I think, at the time of this reformation, I had as much of the Spirit
of the Lord with me as I could well enjoy in my ignorance of the gospel
in its purity. I was full of the testimony of the truth as I understood
it.

This reformation in Hector, was a means of temptation to me. I had
preached and labored with my might to lead the people to the truth, and
Elder Brown had stepped in and reaped the results of my labors. Because
I would not join the Campbellite church and preach for them, I was
entirely thrown aside. The adversary would reason with me thus: "What
is the use of all your preaching? It does not amount to anything to
you. You had better attend to your own business and let such nonsense
alone."

I listened to these suggestions until I had grieved the Spirit of the
Lord which I had enjoyed. I no longer had the Spirit to pray or to
exhort the people to lives of righteousness. I was in this condition
for several months.

In all this lethargy and darkness, I knew there was such a thing as joy
in the Spirit of God--that in the testimony of Jesus there was light
and peace. I knew I had accepted a mission to bear this testimony while
I should remain on the earth.

Knowing these things, I became, in time, alarmed at my condition, I
feared that the Lord had forsaken me. I humbled myself before Him in
fasting and prayer. I promised Him that if He would return His good
Spirit, I would never again reject its suggestions.

Matters continued thus with me for several weeks. In one of my seasons
of prayer and supplication, I sensibly felt that I was again visited
by the Holy Spirit. I was encouraged to resume my labors in exhorting
the people whenever an opportunity was presented. I went from home on
the Sabbath and held meetings in different places. I was employed in
this way when I first saw the Book of Mormon, and when the gospel was
preached to me.

This, and other experiences, have convinced me that when we question
the Holy Spirit it is likely to be grieved, and leave us to ourselves.
Then will our darkness be greater than if we had never enjoyed its
influences. Perhaps this incident in my life may suggest wisdom to
others.

In November, 1829, I removed to a place called Hector Hill. In
February, 1831, my father, my brothers Joseph and Brigham, and Heber C.
Kimball came to my house. They brought with them the Book of Mormon.
They were on their way to visit some Saints in Pennsylvania. Through
fear of being deceived, I was quite cautious in religious matters. I
read and compared the Book of Mormon with the Bible, and fasted and
prayed that I might come to a knowledge of the truth. The Spirit seemed
to say, "This is the way; walk ye in it." This was all the testimony I
could get at the time; it was not altogether satisfactory.

The following May, Elder Levi Gifford came into the neighborhood, and
desired to preach. My brother, John, belonged to the Methodist church,
and had charge of their meeting house which was in the neighborhood.
I obtained from him permission for Elder Gifford to preach in it. The
appointment was circulated for a meeting the same evening.

This was on Saturday evening, and the circuit preacher of that district
was to hold a meeting there on Sunday. Elder Midbury, the circuit
preacher, attended the meeting. The house was crowded. As soon as Elder
Gifford had concluded his discourse, Elder Midbury arose to his feet
and said: "Brethren, sisters and friends: I have been a preacher of the
gospel for twenty-two years; I do not know that I have been the means
of converting a sinner, or reclaiming a poor backslider; but this I do
know, that the doctrine the stranger has preached to us to-night is
a deception, that Joe Smith is a false prophet, and that the Book of
Mormon is from hell."

After talking awhile in this strain, he concluded. I immediately arose
to my feet and asked the privilege of speaking, which was granted.
I said that Elder Midbury, in his remarks, entirely ignored the
possibility of more revelation, and acknowledged that he had been a
preacher of the gospel for twenty-two years, without knowing that he
had been the means of converting a sinner, or of reclaiming a poor
backslider. But still he claimed to know that the doctrine he had just
heard was false, that Joseph Smith was an impostor, and that the Book
of Mormon was from hell. "Now, how is it possible," I asked, "for him
to know these things unless he has received a revelation?"

When I sat down a strong man, by the name of Thompson, who was well
known in the neighborhood as a beligerent character, stepped up to
Elder Gifford and demanded the proofs of the authenticity of the Book
of Mormon.

Elder Gifford replied, "I have said all I care about saying to-night."

Then said Mr. Thompson, "we will take the privilege of clothing you
with a coat of tar and feathers, and riding you out of town on a rail."

In the meantime, four or five others of like character came to the
front.

Acting under the impulse of the moment--true to the instincts of my
nature to protect the weak against the strong, I stepped between Elder
Gifford and Mr. Thompson. Looking the latter in the eye, I said, "Mr.
Thompson, you cannot lay your hand on this stranger to harm a hair of
his head, without you do it over my dead body."

He replied by mere threats of violence, which brought my brother John
to his feet.

With a voice and manner, that carried with it a power greater than I
had ever seen manifested in him before, and, I might say, since, he
commanded Mr. Thompson and party to take their seats. He continued,
"Gentlemen, if you offer to lay a hand on Mr. Gifford, you shall pass
through my hands, after which I think you will not want any more
to-night." Mr. Thompson and party quieted down and then took their
seats.

Since then the Elders have passed through so many similar experiences,
that they have ceased to be a novelty. That there should be such a
powerful antagonism of spirits manifesting themselves in muscle, in a
Christian church, indicated a new era in religious influences.



CHAPTER IV.

CONVERTED--START FOR MISSOURI--CALLED TO PREACH "MORMONISM" WITHOUT
BEING BAPTIZED--JOIN THE CHURCH--VOYAGE TO PITTSBURG--PREACH THE
GOSPEL AND ESTABLISH A BRANCH--EXPERIENCE AS A TRUNKMAKER--MISSION
TO NEW YORK--SPEAK IN TONGUES EFFECTS OF PREACHING COUNTERACTED BY
LIES--SECOND VOYAGE DOWN THE OHIO--PROVIDENTIAL DELAY.

In the spring of 1831 there was a two-days meeting of the Saints, about
six miles from where I lived, in the State of Pennsylvania. I attended
it, and became fully convinced of the divine origin of the latter-day
work.

In the summer of 1831, I settled up my business and started for the
latter-day Zion, in the State of Missouri. On my way out of the State
of New York, I visited Elder J. P. Green, in the town of Avon.

As I arrived there on Saturday, he said, "Brother Lorenzo, I am very
glad you have come. I have an appointment to preach at 10 o'clock,
eight miles from here, but I am very unwell and not able to fill it. I
want you to do it for me."

I rather ridiculed the idea, saying, "You want me to preach as a Mormon
Elder, when I have not even joined the Church?"

He still desired me to go, and said, "it will be all right."

E. M. Green, the son of J. P. Green, accompanied me, with a revelation
on the organization of the Church, which his father directed him to
read to the congregation.

Arriving at the place appointed, I found the house full, and a Baptist
preacher in the stand. I introduced myself to the minister; he invited
the congregation to sing, and I prayed, and E. M. Green read the
revelation. I arose and commenced to speak. The good Spirit was with
me, and I had much freedom. I talked about one hour and a quarter. At
the close I gave any one the privilege of speaking who wished to. The
Baptist minister arose and bore his testimony, that what they had heard
was true Bible doctrine, and could not be questioned.

After meeting, several persons gathered around me and wished to be
baptized. Knowing that I had not received authority to administer the
ordinance, I put them off, telling them that when Elder Green came
to fill the next appointment that had been made for him, he would
baptize them. Among those who requested baptism, at that time, were the
brothers Joseph and Chandler Holbrook, and Mary Ann Angell, now the
relict of President Brigham Young.

On the following morning I told Elder Green that, inasmuch as I had
believed in the gospel for some time, and had preached as a "Mormon"
Elder, I thought it was time that I was baptized. He administered the
ordinance, and ordained me an Elder. I then went on my way rejoicing.

In due time I reached Olean Point, on the Alleghany river, one of the
streams that form the head waters of the Ohio. Several families had
gathered there with the view of descending the river in boats. Among
them were my brother Phineas and his family. The company built two
boats, and started down the Alleghany river, in the month of November.

The river was low and falling. It was my lot, with others, nearly every
morning to get into the water and work the boats off the sand bars upon
which we anchored at night. The water was always cold, and at times the
ice was half an inch thick. I had the whooping cough, and this work was
very severe on me.

We journeyed in this way for three weeks, to Pittsburg, at the head
of the Ohio river. Three days before arriving there my wife was taken
sick, and did not feel that she could travel any farther.

Brother Phineas and I concluded to stop awhile in Pittsburg. We were
destitute of money, having only fifty cents left between us. Soon after
tying up our boat, a report got noised about that we were a party of
"Mormons," on our way to Zion. Some of the ideas of the Saints in
regard to gathering, although often stated erroneously, had obtained
quite an extensive circulation in the country. Many of the people
came to see us, and at first, stared as though beholding some great
curiosity. My brother Phineas and I hired one room and moved into it.
We retained one boat and the remainder of the company went on in the
other.

The way we traveled would now be thought a novel and hard way for the
Saints to gather in these days of railroads. Fifty years have made many
changes, The world is progressing.

Some respectable-looking men inquired if there were any "Mormon"
preachers in the company. We informed them that we were Elders. They
expressed a wish that we would hold a meeting.

We soon learned that Mr. Wm. Harris, of whom we had rented our room,
had somewhere met one of our Elders, learned something of the gospel,
and had been baptized. Up to that time he had made no open profession
of having joined the Saints.

There was a large room in the same house we had moved into. This
Brother Harris offered us for holding meetings in. The first evening
quite a goodly number gathered into it, and my brother Phineas and I
talked to them. Before closing, we gave the privilege for any one to
speak who wished to.

An elderly lady arose and said she had been seeking for the truth
many years, and that she had read the Bible through from Genesis to
Revelations fourteen times, with a prayerful heart, that she might come
to a knowledge of the truth. She testified that what she had just heard
was the first gospel discourse she had ever heard in her life. Almost
in the words of the eunuch to Phillip, she said: "Here is water, what
hinders me from being baptized?"

The house stood on the bank of the Alleghany river. The night was dark,
and we thought it dangerous to try to baptize her.

She called to our minds the case of the jailor, who was baptized in the
self-same hour in which he believed.

We obtained a lantern and went to the bank of the river, the people
following us. We found the bank steep and the water somewhat deep; but
my brother, Phineas held on to me while I baptized the woman.

We continued to hold meetings and baptize until over thirty persons had
united with the Church.

We had authority to preach, baptize and confirm, but we had no
knowledge of the organization of the Church, and knew not how to
organize a branch. In the following winter, of 1831-32, Elder Sidney
Rigdon passed through Pittsburg, and gave us instructions concerning
the organization of the Church. We then organized a branch, and
continued our meetings.

After events have passed, we often see in them a providence leading
to important results. We left our homes in the State of New York for
Missouri, the only objective point in which we felt any interest.
A seeming chance of sickness induced us to stop for a season in
Pittsburg. There we found a people ready to receive the truth. We
preached the gospel, and built up a branch of the Church. We were
evidently led there for the accomplishment of this important work.

As will be seen, we subsequently went to Kirtland, instead of going on
west. But before going to Kirtland, there was yet another place where
we were to preach the gospel.

As before stated, on our arrival in Pittsburg our finances were low.
Brother Phineas soon obtained labor. I was not so successful, I walked
the streets of the town day after day, in search of a job, willing to
accept of anything I could possibly do. Finally I met a man who gave me
some encouragement. Said he, "Are you a mechanic?"

I felt constrained to answer "yes," although I could not really lay
much claim to the profession.

"Well, said he, I want twelve dozen steamboat trunks made."

I replied, "I am your man, but I am traveling. I have stopped here on
account of sickness in my family, and have no tools with me, and no
place to work." He assured me that he had shop, tools and everything
necessary to work with. We went at once to his shop.

I really did not know what a steamboat trunk was. I told him that I
was from the Eastern States, where probably they worked different to
what they did in that country, and I should feel much obliged if he
would lay out a trunk for me, that I might make no mistake. He picked
up a wide board, laid it on a bench, and with square and compass soon
laid out a trunk. "There," said he, "that is the way I do it; but if
it don't suit you, do it as you have a mind to," and he walked out of
the shop. Food and comforts for my family were at stake. I knelt down
and asked the Lord to enable me to do the work in an acceptable manner,
and I arose and went to work with a light heart. I got the bodies of
several trunks together that day. Towards evening my employer came
in, examined my work carefully, and said, "That is good enough. If
you will do them all as well as that, it will do." I put together the
twelve dozen trunks, covered and finished them off to my employer's
satisfaction, and he paid me the money.

For that kindly providence I felt thankful. From that time I found
labor and soon made my family quite comfortable.

In the spring of 1832, it was thought best that I should go on a
mission to the State of New York. I spent the summer in preaching the
gospel. I had joy in my labors, being instrumental in bringing many
into the Church.

I visited the town of Hector, where, by my preaching, as before stated,
a Campbellite church had been organized. I preached in the same house
that I had occupied on the previous occasion. Soon after I commenced to
talk, such a spirit of darkness and opposition prevailed in the house,
that for the first and only time in my life, I was entirely bound.
I stood speechless. The congregation looked at me as if wondering
what could be the matter. A sensation such as I had never felt before
came over me. My tongue seemed numb or paralyzed. In a short time I
commenced to speak in an unknown tongue. I probably spoke about fifteen
minutes. Soon after ceasing to talk, the interpretation came clear and
distinct to my mind. I at once gave it to the congregation.

I had no further difficulty. I talked about an hour. My old friend,
Squire Chase, arose and testified that what he had heard was the truth,
and that the power of God had been made manifest. He and several others
shed tears. Their hearts were softened by the influence of the good
Spirit.

I had some prior engagements to meet at a considerable distance from
Hector. These would keep me away about two weeks. I regretted the
necessity of going away, and left an appointment for another meeting
on my return. I indulged in the hope of establishing a branch of the
Church there.

While I was absent, the Elder Brown, who had organized a Campbellite
Church from converts made by my preaching, heard that I was preaching
"Mormonism." He came there, held meetings and visited from house to
house. He repeated to the people all the extravagant stories and
falsehoods about the Prophet Joseph and the Book of Mormon, which were
so extensively circulated in those early times. When I returned, I
found the minds of the people filled with prejudice and bitterness. The
Spirit manifested to me that more preaching to them would be in vain,
and I went away sorrowing. I have not heard since that any of that
people have ever joined the Church.

I went to Avon, Genesee County, to see my father, John Young. He
desired to go west and see the Prophet. His wife, my stepmother,
preferred to remain with her children.

He had previously sold out his property in the town of Mendon for
several hundred dollars, and had used it to supply the wants of
the Elders. He had served as a soldier during three campaigns of
the revolutionary war. About this time, he received a pension from
the government. This furnished him the means of accompanying me to
Pittsburg. On arriving there, my brother Phineas and I bought a family
boat, in which we went twenty-five miles down the Ohio River. My wife
was again so sick that we felt compelled to stop at Beardstown.

The people came to see us, and soon learned that we were "Mormons."
They expressed a wish that we would preach to them. The following day
being Sunday, we consented to do so if they would furnish a house. Mr.
Isaac Hill, since Bishop for several years of the 2nd Ward of Salt Lake
City, was then a citizen of that place. Through his kindly offices the
school house was opened for us.

After the first meeting, the people desired more. In a few days we
baptized five persons, among them Mr. Hill and Peter Shirts. The latter
is well known to many of the people of Utah.

In a short time, my brother Phineas went to Kirtland with our father.
The Saints desired that I should remain at Beardstown, and I concluded
to spend the winter there. Some of my friends, thinking that I might
get work easier at West Union, five miles from Beardstown, I removed
then. There, although my way at first seemed hedged up, I succeeded
in making my family comfortable through the winter. Again we had been
providentially directed to where there were a few ready to receive the
truth.



CHAPTER V.

REMOVAL TO KIRTLAND--WORK UPON THE TEMPLE--A
LESSON--SICKNESS--PRONOUNCED INCURABLE BY DOCTORS--HEALED IN ANSWER
TO PRAYER--CURED OF LAMENESS--REMOVAL TO MISSOURI--COMMENCEMENT OF
HOSTILITIES--SURROUNDED BY A MOB--FACE DEATH--RESCUED.

In March, 1833, I removed to Kirtland. The Kirtland Temple committee
was appointed June 6th, 1833. About that time, I took with my team
Brothers Hyrum and Joseph Smith, Reynolds Cahoon and my brother
Brigham, to look at a stone quarry, and see if the rock was suitable
for the walls of the temple. It was decided that it would do, and a
part of a load was put on the wagon. We all returned to town, and the
rock was unloaded on the temple ground. As near as I recollect, this
was the first rock hauled for that building.

From that time I worked with the brethren, as occasion required, until
the temple was completed. On the 17th of February, 1834, those holding
the Priesthood were called together to organize a High Council. I was
one of the number. On that occasion I committed a great error. That
it may be a lesson for others, is my reason for relating it here. The
Prophet requested me to take a seat with other brethren who had been
selected for this Council.

Instead of doing as requested, I arose and plead my inability to
fill so responsible a position, manifesting, I think, considerable
earnestness in the matter. The Prophet then said that he really desired
that I should take the place.

Still excusing myself, he appointed another to fill it. I think this
was the reason the Prophet never again called me to fill any important
position in the Priesthood during his life.

I have since learned to go where I am called, and not set up my
judgment against that of those who are called to lead in this kingdom.

When the temple was enclosed, in a meeting of the brethren, called to
consult about its completion, the Prophet desired that a hard finish
be put on its outside walls. None of the masons who had worked on the
building knew how to do it. Looking around on the brethren, his eyes
rested upon me; he said, "Brother Lorenzo. I want you to take hold and
get this finish on the walls. Will you do it?"

"Yes;" I replied; "I will try." The following day, with horse and buggy
I went to Cleveland, twenty-two miles, determined, if possible, to
find a man who understood the business of putting a hard finish on the
walls. I had been there but a short time, inquiring after such a man,
when I met a young man who said he understood the business, had just
completed a job, and wanted another. I employed him at once, put him
and his tools into the buggy, and returned to Kirtland.

We soon had the materials and fixtures on hand to make the mortar. In a
short time the finish was being put upon the walls.

I made a suitable tool and, before the mortar was dry, I marked off the
walls into blocks in imitation of regular stone work. When the finish
was on I commenced penciling.

It was then the last of November, and the weather daily grew colder. A
Brother Stillman assisted me a day or two, but said that he could not
stand the cold, and quit the work.

I continued, day after day, determined, if possible, to complete the
job. When I got badly chilled I went into my house, warmed myself and
returned again to the work.

I completed the task in the fore part of December, but was sick the
last two days. I had caught a bad cold, had a very severe cough, and,
in a few days was confined to my bed.

My disease was pronounced to be the quick consumption. I sank rapidly
for six or seven weeks. For two weeks I was unable to talk. Dr.
Williams, one of the brethren, came to see me, and, considering my case
a bad one, came the next day and brought with him Dr. Seely, an old
practicing physician, and another doctor whose name I have forgotten.
They passed me through an examination. Dr. Seely asserted that I had
not as much lungs left as would fill a tea saucer. He appeared a
somewhat rough, irreligious man. Probably, with what he considered a
good-natured fling at our belief in miracles, he said to my father, as
he left the house:

"Mr. Young, unless the Lord makes your son a new pair of lungs, there
is no hope for him!"

At this time I was so low and nervous that I could scarcely bear any
noise in the room. The next morning after the visit of the doctors, my
father came to the door of the room to see how I was. I recollect his
gazing earnestly at me with tears in his eyes. As I afterwards learned,
he went from there to the Prophet Joseph, and said to him: "My son
Lorenzo is dying; can there not be something done for him?"

The Prophet studied a little while, and replied, "Yes! Of necessity, I
must go away to fill an appointment, which I cannot put off. But you go
and get my brother Hyrum, and, with him, get together twelve or fifteen
good faithful brethren; go to the house of Brother Lorenzo, and all
join in prayer. One be mouth and the others repeat after him in unison.
After prayer, divide into quorums of three. Let the first quorum who
administer, anoint Brother Young with oil; then lay hands on him, one
being mouth and the other two repeating in unison after him. When all
the quorums have, in succession, laid their hands on Brother Young and
prayed for him, begin again with the first quorum, by anointing with
oil as before, continuing the administration in this way until you
receive a testimony that he will be restored."

My father came with the brethren, and these instructions were strictly
followed. The administrations were continued until it came the turn of
the first quorum the third time. Brother Hyrum Smith led. The Spirit
rested mightily upon him. He was full of blessing and prophecy. Among
other things, he said that I should live to go with the Saints into the
bosom of the Rocky Mountains, to build up a place there, and that my
cellar should overflow with wine and fatness.

At that time, I had not heard about the Saints going to the Rocky
Mountains; possibly Brother Smith had. After he had finished he
seemed surprised at some things he had said, and wondered at
the manifestations of the Spirit. I coughed no more after that
administration, and rapidly recovered.

I had been pronounced by the best physicians in the country past all
human aid, and I am a living witness of the power of God manifested in
my behalf through the administration of the Elders.

I continued to live in Kirtland, labored for the support of my family
and went on missions until September, 1837. At that time there was
considerable persecution, and many Saints left for Missouri. In company
with Brother Isaac Decker and family, I started for that place.

On account of sickness in my family, I laid by at Dublin, Indiana. I
remained there until January, 1838.

I went to Cincinnati. While absent, my brother Brigham, and Brothers
Joseph and Samuel Smith, with their families, came along on their way
to Missouri. They were accompanied by Brother Daniel Holman and Brother
Miles. I returned to Dublin, and, in February, we continued our journey
together.

On the way, in jumping from a wagon, I fell and split my knee pan on a
sharp stone. The injury was both painful and dangerous.

Riding over rough roads in a loaded wagon was very painful to me. At
Terre Haute, Indiana, my leg was examined by a surgeon. He said even if
I got well, my leg would always be stiff. However, my faith was that I
should again have the use of it. It was still over four hundred miles
to our destination. I suffered much, but got the use of my leg the
following summer. I attribute this result to the blessing of the Lord
through the administration of the Elders.

On our way, we crossed the Mississippi river at Quincy, Illinois, on
the ice. We were the last to cross in that way that season. When near
the west side, on account of the weakness of the ice, we took the
horses from the wagons and laid down planks to run the latter to the
shore.

In March, Brother Isaac Decker and I arrived in Davis County, Missouri.
I purchased a quarter section of land and went to work to make me a
home. Brother Decker rented a farm. The remainder of the company went
on to Far West, twenty-two miles farther.

We labored diligently at our business during the summer, usually having
meetings on the Sabbath. Matters remained quiet until election day,
August 6th, 1838, when the Missourians determined that the "Mormons"
should not vote. On the other hand, the brethren asserted their rights,
and a fight took place at Gallatin, as related in Church history. I
did not feel like attending election, and did not go. This was the
beginning of our troubles in Davis County.

I lived eighteen miles from Adam Ondi-Ahman. About this time, I left
my family on my place and went there and stood guard some two weeks.
Brother Decker accompanied me. After completing our term of military
service, Brother Decker and I started for home. We had but one horse,
and we alternately rode and walked. As we passed through the town of
Gallatin, about eight miles from home, it was my turn to walk, and
Brother Decker was ahead of me on the horse. There was a company of
Missourians stationed about twenty rods from the road, near a whisky
saloon. As I was passing nearly opposite them, a party of men stepped
in front of me and the leader ordered me to stop. He was armed with a
sword. There were twenty-two of the party, mostly armed with rifles.

Nothing was said to Brother Decker, although he halted and sat on his
horse a short distance off and watched the proceedings.

The captain of the party asked me where I had been, where I was going,
and if I was a "Mormon," with many other questions which I answered
truthfully.

After answering one of his questions, with a profane epithet he called
me a liar. After this, I kept my mouth closed and answered no more of
his questions. He was about half drunk, as were probably some of his
men. He became much irritated at my silence, and used very profane and
abusive language. Said he: "You have probably been robbing and burning
in this section, and ought to be killed. Anyhow, I will make you open
your mouth." He then ordered his men to form in a half circle a little
distance from me, evidently to concentrate their fire. He then ordered
them to "Make ready! Aim!"

Every rifle was drawn on me. I prayed in my heart, and felt
considerable assurance that they would not be permitted to kill me. My
life trembled in the balance awaiting the leader's order to fire, or
recover arms. The latter order came. He then said excitedly: "Now will
you talk?" But I remained silent.

This performance was repeated. He became filled with wrath, and
commanded his men, the third time, "Make ready! Aim!" It looked surely
as though my time had come. At this moment, a man in military garb, and
armed with a sword, came running from the camp near the grocery. When
near enough to to be heard, he cried out, "Hold on!"

The men dropped their pieces, and there was respite for me again. As he
approached he demanded, "What are you doing?"

The officer who had been abusing me, replied with a profane epithet, "I
am going to kill this Mormon!"

The other officer ordered him to take his men to the camp.

As he did not move readily, his superior drew his sword, stepped in
front of him, and declared with an oath, if he did not move at once he
would take his head from his shoulders. His tone and manner indicated
that he meant business, and the captain moved off with his men at once.

The officer who released me, declared that the other was drunk and did
not know what he was doing. He asked me many questions similar to what
the other had done, but in a gentlemanly manner, and I answered them
frankly and truly. His heart was softened towards me. He bade me go on
my way, and added, "Mr. Young if you are ever in trouble in this war,
and can do so, send for me, and you shall not be hurt, unless it is
over my dead body." I made a memorandum of his name, military title,
etc., but regret to say that in my many moves since have lost it.

Again was the prophetic promise of my mother fulfilled, and my life
lengthened out for some wise purpose. Brother Decker and I went on
home. He immediately removed to Far West, Caldwell County.



CHAPTER VI.

WARNED TO LEAVE THE COUNTRY OR RENOUNCE "MORMONISM"--WIFE AND CHILDREN
THREATENED--A BOY'S PLUCK--FORCED TO FLEE FOR OUR LIVES--PROPERTY
CONFISCATED--BATTLE OF CROOKED RIVER--PROVIDENTIALLY SAVED--FAR WEST
BESIEGED--ESCAPE TO IOWA--PURSUED--PROVIDENTIAL SNOW STORM.

In a day or two after my return home, Mr. Richard Welding, of whom I
had bought my farm, came to me, accompanied by three or four others. He
gave me warning to leave the country at once.

I asked him why I must leave, saying: "Have I not bought my land, and
paid you for it? Have I not attended to my own business?"

He replied: "Mr. Young, we do not want you to leave. You are a good
neighbor and citizen, and if you will only be man enough to renounce
Joe Smith and your religion, we want you to remain with us, and I will
protect you in your rights. The Mormons must all leave the country, and
if you do not renounce them, you must go too."

I paid no attention to this warning.

Three or four days after this occurrence, four men rode up in front of
my house, when I happened to be away, called Sister Young to the door,
and again gave warning that we had better leave.

By her side stood our little boy, Joseph W. One of the men, using an
oath, ordered him to go into the house or he would blow his brains out.
The boy stepped back, without his mother noticing what he was doing,
took my rifle, which was standing in the room, and, before he had
attracted her attention, was leveling it on the threatener. She quietly
told him not to fire, as they would certainly be killed if he did.

He obeyed, but manifested considerable beligerency for one of his age.

About five days after this warning, early in the morning, I looked up
the road towards Gallatin, and saw a man on horseback coming towards my
house at full speed. As he rode up he inquired: "Is your name Young?"

I answered that it was.

He continued: "I have rode from Gallatin to inform you that, in two or
three hours, there will be a company of forty men here, who assert that
if they find you here, they will fasten you and your family in your
house and burn it down. For God's sake, if you value your own life and
the lives of your wife and children, do not be here an hour from now. I
have come to give you this warning as a friend. Should it be found out
that I have done so, I might lose my own life!"

I thanked him for his kindness, and he rode off rapidly towards
Gallatin. I told Sister Young to prepare to leave at once, then
attached my team to a light spring wagon, put a bed, a few cooking
utensils, a trunk of clothing, and some food for the day into it. I got
my wife, my four children, William, Harriet, Joseph and John into the
wagon, fastened up the house and started for Far West.

I expected to return and get my goods. The next day I obtained some
teams and started for my goods. I found the road strongly guarded, and
the Missourians threatened to kill me if I went on. I never obtained
goods, cows nor anything that I had left on my place.

This left my family very destitute, in common with others of the Saints
who had been treated in like manner.

I had previously driven a fine yoke of oxen and a new milch cow to Far
West, thinking I might possibly want to remove there; but Clark's army
drove my oxen into camp and butchered them for beef. I was promised pay
for them, but, of course, never received anything but the promise.

This was in October, 1838. I remained in Far West doing whatever was
necessary for the protection of the Saints. I was on guard much of the
time.

Major Seymour Brunson directed Brother A. P. Rockwood, and myself to
take our horses and go out two miles north of Far West and patrol the
country every night. If we saw a man, or company of men coming towards
Far West, we were ordered to hail them and demand the countersign. If
necessary, to make this demand the second time, when, if not given, we
were to fire on them. When we arrived on the ground where we were to
perform our duties, Brother Rockwood and I separated, taking different
directions. It was a moonlight night. I was on the edge of a prairie
with my eye along the road, when I discovered a company of mounted men
coming over a swell of the prairie. I retired into the timber and took
a station behind the trunk of a large tree, under the shadow of its
branches, and twenty or thirty yards from the road. As the company came
opposite to me, I demanded the countersign twice, as I had been ordered
to do. As they paid no attention to me, I made ready to fire, intending
to shoot the leader, when a strong and sudden impression came over me
to hail again. I did so, and ordered them to halt. This time the leader
recognized my voice, and turning towards me, asked: "Is that you,
Brother Lorenzo?" I also recognized the man as Brother Lyman Wight,
and, as I answered in the affirmative, rode up to his side. We were
glad to meet each other, and I was very thankful that I had not obeyed
orders. He was on his way from Diamond to Far West, with a company of
men to assist the Saints there.

Soon after this occurrence, I returned to Far West. I told Sister Young
that I hoped to get one good night's sleep. For three weeks I had not
had my clothes off to lay down, and I felt much worn.

Perhaps I had slept two hours, when I was awakened by the bass drum
sounding an alarm on the public square. I was soon out to see what was
the matter. There were five men on the square, of whom I inquired the
cause of the alarm. They informed me that two of the brethren had been
taken prisoners by the mob on Crooked River, tried by a court martial
that day, and condemned to be shot the coming morning at eight o'clock.
A company of men was wanted to go and rescue them.

Preparations were soon made, and in a short time, about 40 mounted men,
under the command of David W. Patten, were ready to start. We kept
the road to a ford on Crooked River, twenty miles distant, where we
expected to find the mob.

Just as the day was breaking we dismounted, about a mile from the ford,
tied our horses, and left Brother Isaac Decker to watch them.

We marched down the road some distance, when we heard the crack of
a rifle. Brother Obanion, who was one step in advance of me fell. I
assisted brother John P. Green, who was the captain of the platoon I
belonged to, to carry him to the side of the road. We asked the Lord to
preserve his life, laid him down, ran on and took our places again.

The man who shot Brother Obanion was a picket guard of the mob, who was
secreted in ambush by the roadside. Captain Patten was ahead of the
company.

As we neared the river the firing was somewhat lively. Captain Patten
turned to the left of the road, with a part of the command; Captain
Green and others turned to the right.

We were ordered to charge, which we did, to the bank of the river, when
the enemy broke and fled.

I snapped my gun twice at a man in a white blanket coat. While engaged
in repriming my gun, he got out of range.

A tall, powerful, Missourian sprang from under the bank of the river,
and, with a heavy sword in hand, rushed towards one of the brethren,
crying out, "Run, you devils, or die!"

The man he was making for was also armed with a sword, but was small
and poorly calculated to withstand the heavy blows of the Missourian.
He, however, succeeded in defend-himself until I ran to his aid, and
leveled my gun within two feet of his enemy, but it missed fire.

The Missourian turned on me. With nothing but the muzzle end of my
rifle to parry his rapid blows, my situation was perilous. The man
whom I had relieved, for some reason, did not come to the rescue. I
succeeded in parrying the blows of my enemy until he backed me to
the bank of the river. I could back no farther without going off the
perpendicular bank, eight or ten feet above the water. In a moment I
realized that my chances were very desperate. At this juncture the
Missourian raised his sword, apparently throwing all his strength and
energy into the act, as if intending to crush me with one desperate
blow.

As his arm extended I saw a hand pass down the back of his head and
between his shoulders. There was no other person visible, and I have
always believed that I saw the hand of the angel of the Lord interposed
for my deliverance. The arm of my enemy was paralyzed, and I had time
to extricate myself from the perilous situation I was in.

As soon as I had time to think, I felt that the inspiration of my
mother's promise had been again verified. The appearance of the hand,
to me, was real. I do not see how I could have been saved in the way I
was, without a providential interference.

As soon as I was out of danger, my attention was drawn to brother David
W. Patten, who lay on the ground a short distance from me, mortally
wounded. We hitched a pair of horses to a wagon, put brother Patten and
six other wounded men into it, and started for Far West.

A few miles from the battle ground we met the Prophet Joseph, with a
carriage and a company of horsemen. The wounded were taken to their
homes, and such care given them as circumstances would allow.

Soon after our return to Far West, General Clark's army arrived before
that city. In the evening after Joseph and Hyrum Smith and others had
been taken prisoners, Hyrum Smith had the privilege of coming into Far
West to see his family. From the spirit of General Clark and his army,
he believed that, if they succeeded in taking the brethren who were
in the Crooked River battle, they would be tried by a court martial
and shot. He and Brother Brigham, and myself met on the public square.
After counseling over the matter, it was decided that I, and others in
the same situation, should start that night into the wilderness north,
for the Des Moines River, in Iowa Territory. My brother, Phineas, being
a good woodsman, was selected to pilot us.

The Saints in Far West had been so plundered by their enemies, that
they had but little surplus to eat or wear.

I had on a very thin pair of pants. My wife took a sheet from the bed,
and, with the assistance of some of the neighbors, hastily made me a
pair of drawers. These I afterwards gave to my brother Phineas, as he
seemed to suffer more with the cold than I did. Our bedding was as
scanty as our clothing.

We left Far West that night, and took no food with us. We arrived about
sunrise in the morning, at Adam-Ondi-Ahman, twenty-two miles from Far
West. We needed some breakfast, and stopped in a clump of hazel brush,
and sent one of the party to the house of Brother Gardiner Snow, to
tell him our situation. He said he had not much to eat, but would do
the best he could. He brought us a very good supply of stewed Missouri
pumpkin and milk. Our keen appetites made this seem a very good
breakfast.

There we obtained fifty pounds of chopped corn. With this meagre
supply of food we continued on our journey. From the first, it was
evident that we must be very saving of our food supply. We rationed
on eight ounces of this meal, per man, each day. It was mixed with
water, without any salt, baked in a cake before the fire, and carefully
divided out.

The second day, as night was approaching, we struck the edge of a
prairie, which was about four miles across. As our horses were weary,
we stopped a short time to rest, when one Irvine Hodge overtook us. He
informed us that General Clark, having learned of our departure, had
sent a troop of sixty cavalrymen in pursuit; that they were only a few
miles behind, and on our trail. Their orders were to bring us dead or
alive. We had thought of camping on the spot, but concluded to cross
the prairie at once. This we accomplished, and camped in the timber. In
the night, snow commenced falling. It appeared to come down in sheets
instead of flakes. In the morning it was about a foot and a half deep.
Some of the company, at first, regretted this, but others saw and felt
that the hand of the Lord was in it. My brother, Phineas, at once
declared that it was the means of our deliverance. We started on and
the wind began to blow. Our tracks were completely covered soon after
they were made.

We afterwards learned that our pursuers camped on the opposite side of
the prairie from us, where we had rested. In the morning they tried to
find our trail, but finding it impossible to do so, gave up pursuit.

Thus we were saved from our enemies by a friendly interposition of the
elements in our behalf.

We were fifteen days on our journey from Far West to the Des Moines
River. The last three days we were without food. After the snow fell,
our horses had to subsist on what they could find above it.

The brush had soon made my thin pants unavailable for covering my legs
in the neighborhood of the knees. The fragments were tied up with small
hickory withes. When we arrived near a house, on the Des Moines, I
remained in the woods while one of my companions went to the house and
obtained a pair of pants, that I might be presentable.

On this trip it seemed as though both men and animals had a wonderful
power of enduring cold, hunger and fatigue. I am constrained, after
more than forty years have passed away, to acknowledge a special
providence in our deliverance.

I have drawn on my memory for the facts of this narrative, and think
that they are correct; but there may be some errors in dates, and in
the succession of events.



AN INSTANCE OF DIVINE INTERPOSITION.

BY ELDER WILLIAM BUDGE.

VISIT TO SCOTLAND--MEET OLD FRIENDS--RETURN TO LIVERPOOL--ABOUT TO GO
BY STEAMER TO BRISTOL--A VOICE WARNS ME NOT TO GO--TURN BACK--SHORT OF
MONEY--MEANS PROVIDENTIALLY PROVIDED--JOURNEY TO PORTSMOUTH--SEQUEL TO
THE WARNING--THE STEAMER WRECKED.

I had been laboring in the Southampton Conference, England, as a
missionary for about two years, when I obtained permission to visit my
relatives in Scotland. It was in the latter part of the summer of 1853.

Accompanied by an Elder named Armstrong, who was going to Liverpool, I
embarked at Portsmouth, on the steamship _Duke of Cornwall_, bound for
that port, on the morning of the 8th of August.

Shortly after starting, we passed the British fleet, lying off
Spithead, preparing for a grand review, to take place on the following
Thursday, which Queen Victoria was expected to attend. The scene
was both novel and interesting, as we passed near the assembled and
decorated ships.

Passing the Isle of Wight, of which we had a good view, we called at
Plymouth, Falmouth, and Penzance, before reaching Liverpool, passing
also the celebrated Eddystone Lighthouse.

We reached Liverpool at two p. m., on the 10th, and I sailed for
Glasgow within two hours afterwards. On board the Scotch steamer, I was
pleased to find an old acquaintance, named George Turnbull, who was at
that time a clerk in the Church office at Liverpool, and on his way,
like myself, to visit his home and friends.

Brother Turnbull and I heard the gospel about the same time, in the
same city, (Glasgow) and became members of the same branch of the
Church; he being baptized first. This young man was a scholar, and
possessed of much natural ability, and for some time, was a good Saint,
but he would not run the race; he eventually fell into transgression,
denied the faith, and was lost.

There were also on board the vessel, Elder Fullmer, pastor of the
Liverpool Conference, and wife, and Elder John O. Angus, President of
the Shropshire Conference. I was well acquainted with the latter; he
was a faithful missionary, and a quiet, humble, and inoffensive man. He
labored for a long time in the St. George Temple, and died some time
ago.

Such company was very agreeable, but the night was somewhat stormy, and
we did not reach Glasgow until two p. m. next day.

During this trip, I visited my relatives in Glasgow, Lanark, and
elsewhere, and also the Saints in a district of the conference where
I had formerly labored. I felt truly grateful to the Lord for all His
goodness unto me, in preserving me while struggling hard in several new
fields of labor to which I had been allotted, since I first left home
and beg an my labors as a missionary.

On the first day of September, taking leave of my friends, I embarked
on a steam vessel for Liverpool. Elder John O. Angus was also a
passenger, and I, therefore, had good company during a very stormy
passage. Arriving at Liverpool, we called at the Church office, Wilton
Street, and lodged at the house of Elder A. F. Macdonald, president of
the conference.

I intended to go by sea from Liverpool to Bristol, and by land to
Salisbury, on my way back to Portsmouth, as I had not means enough to
go through by railroad conveyance. I had explained this to Brother
Angus, and on the morning after our arrival in Liverpool, I bade him
good by, and walked down to the docks, carrying my carpet sack and a
number of books, which I had brought with me from home. This was on the
third day of September, 1853.

A number of people were waiting to go on board the same steam vessel I
intended to take. The steamer at the time was taking in freight at the
opposite side of the dock, and would call for us, so we were informed,
in a short time.

While standing looking at the vessel, a voice, loud and distinct, said:
"Do not go on board." I was startled, and looked around, but there was
no one near. Although I turned hastily, I did not really expect to see
any one who might have spoken. It was, I felt, a revelation; I was
impressed with the divine force, and I lifted my satchel preparatory
to leaving, but suddenly I thought of my want of means, and began to
wonder whether I had not been deceived by my imagination. I put down
my satchel again, just as the ship was nearing that part of the dock
where the passengers were waiting. My condition tempted me. I was in
doubt for a moment. I began to reason; but faith triumphed. I felt sure
that it was a warning, and, lifting my baggage, left the dock for the
Lime Street Station, as the people who had been waiting passed into the
steamer.

Once decided, there was no further trouble, and I began to consider how
I could reach Portsmouth. When I entered the station, I had concluded
to take the first third-class train to Birmingham. At that time, I had
no acquaintances there, and wished to hurry on, trusting that the way
would be opened up as my necessities required; such having been the
case many times before. The Lord had prepared the way in times past,
and I had faith that He would help me then sufficiently.

I was one of those young and very inexperienced Elders, sent into the
missionary field literally without purse or scrip. Elder George B.
Wallace, at that time one of the presidency of the Church in Europe,
sent me with several others into Cumberland County, in the North of
England, where there were no Saints until we were instrumental in the
hands of the Lord in bringing some to a knowledge of the truth.

It was a hard country, and we had a rough experience. In less than
three months, three Elders out of five returned home; but Elder Thomas
Wallace, now of Weber County, and I remained until the Lord called us
somewhere else.

I have been in many new fields of labor since, without money and
without friends until the Lord raised them up, but never among a people
so ignorant, and unimpressionable as the people we could obtain access
to in the North of England. In comparison, my prospects, as I walked
into the Lime Street Station, were not at all discouraging, but as I
entered, there stood Brother Angus, who was waiting for a train to take
him to Shrewsbury.

He was surprised to see me, and I was a little abashed, as I felt
somewhat delicate about giving him an explanation. Although satisfied
myself, I had some misgivings about satisfying him. I told him,
however, what had happened, and, to my relief, he said, putting his
hand on my shoulder, "You have done just right, and you will see the
hand of God in this."

A third-class train, I learned, would not leave until next morning, so
I lodged with Brother Turnbull, who had returned to Liverpool.

The next day I went to Birmingham, and there learned that a cheap
excursion train would leave for Bristol at five p. m. Bristol--going
by land--was not directly on my way, but the fare being low, and
going from there to Warminster and Salisbury, I was likely to reach
Portsmouth sooner than any other way.

In the cars, I made the acquaintance of a lady and gentleman also going
to Bristol, to visit some relatives they had in that town. After an
interesting conversation they invited me to take lunch with them, which
was very acceptable, and on our arrival at Bristol, they pressed me to
accompany them to their friend's house, where I remained all night,
being warmly received and well treated.

I had not quite a dollar in my possession, and I acknowledge the hand
of the Lord in thus opening up the way for me.

On reaching Warminster next day at six p. m., I had only twelve cents
left, and a heavy carpet sack, which I took to a carrier who made
occasional trips with freight to Salisbury, and I started at once to
walk to the latter place, distant twenty-two miles.

It was evening and the weather pleasant, and the distance nothing
unusual for a missionary, but I made a mistake by starting out too
fast, perspired, got tired, and was obliged to take lodging at a small
way-side inn, which cost me eight cents. I slept without supper and
resumed my journey without breakfast the next morning, but thanking the
Lord for good health and spirits.

On reaching Salisbury, where I was a perfect stranger, I walked into
the town with the intention of inquiring for Latter-day Saints, a few
of whom I understood lived there. My first inquiry was of a little
boy, who quickly answered "Yes, my mother is one," and at once offered
to conduct me to his home, which we soon reached, and to which I was
warmly welcomed.

On passing through the streets, I saw, posted upon the walls,
announcements of an excursion trip to Southampton and Portsmouth,
fare two shillings and six pence, or sixty-two cents in our money.
Reflecting upon the means of obtaining such a sum without being obliged
to write and wait for it, we reached the house of my guide's mother.

From the boy's statement that his mother was a "Mormon," I got the
impression that his father, if he had one, was not, which I found to
be correct. His father was not very friendly, but his mother was a
very earnest Saint, and a very thoughtful and kind one, as while I sat
taking some refreshments which she had hastily prepared, she brought
and gave me a piece of money, the exact amount necessary to procure my
ticket to Portsmouth. I again thanked the Lord, and explained to my
kind sister what her gift would enable me to do. The boy had in the
meantime, by her instructions, brought my carpet sack, and I was ready
to continue my journey.

I reached Portsmouth on the 7th day of September, and while there
on the 9th, I read in the newspaper of the total wreck of the steam
vessel, on which I was about to sail from Liverpool, when I was warned
by the Lord not to go on board the ship.



MY LAST MISSION TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.

BY WM. W. CLUFF.

CHAPTER I.

ELDERS CALLED HOME FROM THE SANDWICH ISLANDS--NATIVE ELDER LEFT TO
PRESIDE--GIBSON'S ARRIVAL IN SALT LAKE--JOINS THE CHURCH--ASKS FOR A
MISSION TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS--HIS DEEP-LAID SCHEME--LEADING ASTRAY
THE HAWAIIAN SAINTS--FIVE ELDERS SENT TO INVESTIGATE--ARRIVAL AT THE
SANDWICH ISLANDS--ATTEMPT TO GO ASHORE IN A BOAT--CAPSIZED IN THE
SURF--ELDER LORENZO SNOW LOST--AFTER A LONG SEARCH, FOUND UNDER THE
BOAT--EFFORTS TO RESUSCITATE HIM--RESTORED TO LIFE ONE HOUR AFTER BEING
DROWNED.

In the summer and autumn of 1857, a United States army was marching
towards Utah, evidently with hostile intentions towards its people. It
was thought wisdom, by the authorities of the Church, to concentrate
the strength of the Saints for any emergency, by calling home the
Elders that were on foreign missions.

When the last of the Elders from Utah left the Sandwich Islands, on
the 1st of May, 1858, the care of the Saints on each of the islands
was entrusted to a native Elder. Kailihune was appointed to preside
over the gathering place on Lanai. He was among the first fruits of the
labors of the Elders, and for a long time had been very efficient and
faithful.

During our difficulties with the government Walter M. Gibson, an
adventurer, came to Utah. His ostensible object was to induce President
Young, and the general Church authorities, to remove our people _en
masse_, to the East India Islands. He painted, in glowing colors,
the splendid facilities and opportunities those islands offered for
immigration and colonization, by an enterprising and industrious people
like the Latter-day Saints.

In his ignorance, he supposed that the object of the founder and
leaders of the Church was to found a powerful and independent
nation. The object of these schemes was, evidently, his own personal
aggrandizement.

It had, no doubt, been a favorite project of his, for years, to found
a government somewhere on the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Failing
in his scheme for the removal of the Church, some other plan must be
devised for the accomplishment of his cherished purpose.

He professed to become a convert to our faith, and was baptized into
the Church. He then requested to be sent on a mission to the Polynesian
Islands. He desired a roving commission from the Presidency of the
Church, authorizing him to travel and preach, on any or all of the
islands, in the Pacific Ocean.

Before leaving Salt Lake City, Mr. Gibson made it a specialty to
converse with the Elders who had lately returned from the Sandwich
Islands. He sought to be well informed on the general condition of the
islands, the customs, traditions, and general character of the natives,
and, especially did he seek to be well informed as to the numbers,
organization, location, and general condition of the native Saints. His
object, in this, developed afterwards.

When he left Utah he went directly to the Sandwich Islands. He soon
found some of the Saints, and represented to them, that he had been
sent by President Young, not only to take charge of the mission on
those islands, but to preside over all the churches that might be
raised up on any of the Pacific islands, and, in that capacity, that he
was equal to, and entirely independent of President Young.

The native Saints had been left about two years to themselves. They
were naturally simple and credulous, and it was easy to impose upon
them.

As soon as Mr. Gibson acquired some knowledge of the native language,
he commenced traveling among the branches of the Church, and grafted
on to the gospel, many of the old traditions and superstitions of the
Hawaiians. He reorganized the Church, or, more properly speaking,
reconstructed it in accordance with his own notions, throughout the
islands.

He was one of those characters, of whom the apostle Peter warned
the Saints in his day, "and through covetousness shall they with
feigned words make merchandise of you." He ordained twelve apostles,
and charged them one hundred and fifty dollars each for initiating
them into the office, and charged High Priests, Seventies, etc,
proportionately, according to the presumed importance of the offices.

By this and other impositions, he succeeded in raising sufficient means
for the purchase of one half of the island of Lanai. Some years before
the Elders had leased the same tract of land, of Halelea, a native
chief, for a temporary gathering place for the Saints.

Mr. Gibson represented to the Saints that he was securing the land for
them, but that it would have to be deeded to him for them.

For the accomplishment of his purpose, concentration and organization
were necessary. He continued to gather the Saints to Lanai. There he
organized all the males, old and young, into companions, and daily
drilled them in the art of war. He informed them that, as soon as they
were properly disciplined, it was his intention to build or purchase a
vessel, equip it, and sail for one of the South Sea Islands. He would
seek a favorable opportunity, conquer the natives, leave some of his
disciplined men in charge of the conquered territory, and fill up his
depleted ranks with raw recruits.

In this way, he designed to conquer one island after another, until he
organized a large fleet, and subjugated all the Polynesian Islands.
Thus he hoped to realize his wildest dreams by organizing, as he
expressed it, "_One great grand empire_," that would be able to take
its place among the leading nations of the earth.

His every act from the time of his arrival in Utah, had been designed
for his own aggrandizement. He had learned nothing of the spirit and
power of the gospel. The Lord is establishing His kingdom, and he
was fighting against it. If he has not already done so, he will yet
realize the truth of the saying of the Savior, in his teachings, when,
on his earthly mission, he likened the Kingdom of God to a stone, and
said, "And whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it may fall, it will grind him to powder."

Notwithstanding the Saints had been gradually led astray by Mr. Gibson,
they felt that his teachings and practices were not the same as those
of the Elders who had labored among them before his coming.

Fearing they might be deceived, some eight of the native Elders wrote
to brethren in Utah who had labored for many years among them. They
stated some of the facts concerning Mr. Gibson's course, and asked for
advice. This communication was translated and submitted to President
Young.

The First Presidency decided that Apostles E. T. Benson and Lorenzo
Snow should visit the islands, and that Elders Joseph. F. Smith, Alma
L. Smith, and myself, who had previously been on missions to the
islands and understood the native language, should accompany them.

We arrived at Honolulu, the capital of the islands, about the 27th
of March, 1864. On the 29th we sailed for Lahaina, on the schooner,
_Nettie Merrill_, Captain Fisher, for the island of Maui, a distance of
about ninety miles from Honolulu. On the morning of the 31st of March,
we came to anchor about one mile from the mouth of the little harbor of
Lahaina.

Apostles Ezra T. Benson, Lorenzo Snow, Brother Alma L. Smith, and
myself, got into the small boat to go ashore. Brother Joseph F. Smith,
as he afterwards stated, had some misgivings about going in that boat,
but the manifestation was not sufficiently strong to indicate any
general accident. He preferred to remain on board the vessel, until the
boat returned.

The boat started for the shore. It contained some barrels and boxes,
the captain, a white man, two or three native passengers, and the
boat's crew, who were also natives.

The entrance to the harbor is a very narrow passage between coral
reefs, and when the sea is rough it is very dangerous, on account of
the breakers. Where the vessel lay the sea was not rough, but only
presented the appearance of heavy swells rolling to the shore.

As we approached the reef it was evident to me, that the surf was
running higher than we anticipated. I called the captain's attention to
the fact. We were running quartering across the waves, and I suggested
that we change our course so as to run at right angles with them. He
replied, that he did not think there was any danger, and our course was
not changed. We went but little farther, when a heavy swell struck the
boat and carried us before it about fifty yards. When the swell passed
it left us in a trough between two huge waves.

It was too late to retrieve our error, and we must run our chances.
When the second swell struck the boat, it raised the stern so high that
the steersman's oar was out of the water, and he lost control of the
boat. It rode on the swell a short distance, and swung around just as
the wave began to break up. We were almost instantly capsized, into the
dashing, foaming sea.

I felt no concern for myself about drowning, for while on my former
mission I had learned to swim and sport in the surf of those shores.

The last I remembered of Brother Snow, as the boat was going over I saw
him seize the upper edge of it with both hands. Fearing that the upper
edge of the boat, or the barrels, might hit and injure me as the boat
was going over, I plunged head foremost into the water. After swimming
a short distance, I came to the surface without being strangled or
injured.

The boat was bottom upwards, and barrels, hats, and umbrellas were
floating in every direction. I swam to the boat and as there was
nothing to cling to on the bottom, I reached under and seized the edge
of it.

About the same time, brother Benson came up near me, and readily got
hold of the boat.

The natives soon appeared, and swam about quite unconcerned for their
own safety. Brother Alma L. Smith came up on the opposite side of the
boat from brother Benson and myself. He was considerably strangled, but
succeeded in securing a hold on the boat.

A short time afterwards the captain was discovered, about fifty yards
from us. Two of his sailors swam to his assistance, and, one on each
side, succeeded in keeping him on the surface, although life was
apparently extinct.

Nothing yet had been seen of Brother Snow, although the natives had
been swimming and diving in every direction in search of him. We were
only about one fourth of a mile from the shore. The people, as soon as
they discovered our circumstances, manned a life boat and hurried to
the rescue.

We were taken into the boat, when the crew wanted to row for the shore,
and pick up the captain on the way. We told them that one of our
friends was yet missing, and we did not want to leave, as long as there
was any possibility of a chance to render him assistance. We discovered
that a second boat had left the shore, and could reach the captain as
soon as the one we were in. Seeing this, the crew of the boat we were
in, consented to remain and assist us.

The captain was taken ashore, and, by working over him for some time,
was brought to life.

The life of Captain Fisher would not, probably, have been much
endangered, except for a sack of four or five hundred dollars in silver
which he held in his hand. This he clung to with great tenacity. When
the boat capsized the weight of it took him at once to the bottom. The
natives dove and brought him up, still clinging to the sack. When his
vitality was restored, the first thing he inquired about was the money;
intimating to the natives, with peculiar emphasis, that it would not
have been healthy for them to have lost it.

Brother Snow had not yet been discovered, and the anxiety was intense.
The natives were, evidently, doing all in their power.

Finally, one of them, in edging himself around the capsized boat, must
have felt Brother Snow with his feet and pulled him, at least partly,
from under it, as the first I saw of Brother Snow was his hair floating
upon the water as the native was dragging him through the water around
one end of the capsized boat. As soon as we got him into our boat, we
told the boatmen to pull for the shore with all possible speed. His
body was stiff, and life was evidently extinct.

Brother Alma L. Smith and myself were sitting side by side. We laid
Brother Snow across our laps, and, on the way to shore, we quietly
administered to him and asked the Lord to spare his life, that he might
return to his family and home.

On reaching the shore, we carried him a little way, to some large
empty barrels that were lying on the sandy beach. We laid him, face
downwards, on one of these, and rolled him back and forth until we
succeeded in getting the water that he had swallowed out of him.

During this time, a number of persons came down from the town; among
them was Mr. E. P. Adams, a merchant. All were willing to do what they
could. We washed Brother Snow's face with camphor, furnished by Mr.
Adams. We did not only what was customary in such cases, but also what
the spirit seemed to whisper to us.

After working over him for some time, without any indications of
returning life, the bystanders said that nothing more could be done
for him. But we did not feel like giving him up, and still prayed and
worked over him, with an assurance that the Lord would hear and answer
our prayers.

Finally we were impressed to place our mouth over his and make an
effort to inflate his lungs, alternately blowing in and drawing out the
air, imitating, as far as possible, the natural process of breathing.
This we persevered in until we succeeded in inflating his lungs. After
a little, there were very faint indications of returning vitality. A
slight wink of the eye, which, until then, had been open and deathlike,
and a very faint rattle in the throat, were the first symptoms of
returning life. These grew more and more distinct, until consciousness
was fully restored.

When this result was reached, it must have been fully an hour after the
capsizing of the boat. A Portuguese man, living in Lahaina, who, from
the first, rendered us much assistance, invited us to take Brother Snow
to his house. There being no Saints in the place, we gladly accepted
his kind offer.

Every possible attention was given to Brother Snow's comfort.

Persons in danger and excitement, often see things a little
differently. The following is Apostle Snow's account of the capsizing
of the boat:

"As we were moving along within some half a mile from the point where
we expected to land, my attention was suddenly arrested by Captain
Fisher calling to the oarsmen, in a voice which denoted some alarm,
'Hurry up! hurry up!' I quickly discovered the cause of alarm.

"A short distance behind us, I saw an immense surf, thirty or forty
feet high rushing towards us swifter than a race horse. We had scarcely
a moment for reflection before the huge mass was upon us. In an instant
our boat, with its contents, as though it were only a feather, was
hurled into the briny water, and we were under this rolling, seething,
mountain wave.

"This was certainly unexpected. It took me by surprise. I think,
however, that I soon comprehended the situation: that we were in the
midst of the turbulent waters, a quarter of a mile from the shore,
without much probability of receiving human aid.

"I felt confident, however, that there would be some way of escape;
that the Lord would provide the means, for it was not possible that
my life and mission were thus to terminate. This reliance on the Lord
banished fear, and inspired me with hope up to the last moment of
consciousness.

"Having been somewhat subject to fainting spells, I believe that after
a few moments in the water, I must have fainted, as I did not suffer
the pain common in the experience of drowning persons. I had been in
the water only a few moments, until I lost consciousness.

"The first I knew afterwards, I was on shore receiving the kind and
tender attentions of my brethren. The first recollection I have of
returning consciousness, was seeing a very small light, the smallest
maginable. This soon disappeared, and I was again in total darkness.
Again it appeared, much larger than before, then sank away and left me,
as before, in forgetfulness. Thus it continued to come and go, until,
finally, I recognized, as I thought, persons whispering, and soon after
I asked in a feeble whisper, 'What is the matter?'

"I immediately recognized the voice of Elder Cluff, as he replied, 'You
have been drowned; the boat upset in the surf.' Quick as lightning,
the scene of our disaster flashed upon my mind. I immediately asked,
'Are you brethren all safe?' The emotion that was awakened in my bosom
by the answer of Elder Cluff, will remain as long as life continues:
'Brother Snow, we are all safe.'

"I rapidly recovered, and very soon was able to walk and accompany the
brethren to our lodgings."

As soon as Brother Snow was out of danger, it occurred to me that I had
better return to the vessel.

As I reached the deck, by the rope ladder over its side, I saw, at a
glance, that Brother Smith was under great anxiety of mind.

We were both under an intensity of feeling, which men usually
experience only a few times in their lives. Brother Smith had been
informed by a native that the captain and an elderly white man were
drowned. The latter, he supposed to be Brother Benson, hence his great
anxiety.

My own nervous system was strung up to an extreme tension by the
events of the past two hours. When I told Brother Smith that all were
safe, the sudden revulsion of feeling almost overcame him. We rejoiced
together that through a merciful Providence, and the faith that had
been bestowed upon us, we were all alive.



CHAPTER II.

JOURNEY TO LANAI--MEET MR. GIBSON--REVERENCE OF NATIVES FOR HIM--HIS
SPEECH AND ASSUMPTION--ELDER JOSEPH F. SMITH'S REPLY--ELDER SNOW'S
PROPHECY--MR. GIBSON CUT OFF THE CHURCH--ELDER SNOW'S PROPHECY
FULFILLED--ADVISED TO SELECT A NEW GATHERING PLACE--A VISION--SUITABLE
PLACE POINTED OUT.

ON the 2nd of April, Brother Snow had so far recovered his strength,
that it was thought best to pursue our journey. We hired some natives
to take us in an open boat across the channel, sixteen miles, to Lanai.
We arrived at the landing place, three miles from the village, just at
dark. We sent a messenger to Mr. Gibson, with the request that he would
send down some saddle horses for us to ride up in the morning.

Early the following morning, April 3rd, the horses were ready for us.
An hour's ride over a rough, rocky road brought us to the settlement.
Our reception by Mr. Gibson, and most of the native Saints, was cool
and very formal. Many improvements had been made since our last visit,
that were praiseworthy, and reflected great credit on Mr. Gibson.

After breakfast, Apostles Benson and Snow engaged in conversation with
Mr. Gibson on the affairs of the mission.

That day and the following, were principally spent in laboring with
Mr. Gibson and the native Elders, to get them, if possible, to see the
condition they were in. During this time, Brothers Joseph F. Smith,
Alma L. Smith and myself, took a ride around the valley accompanied by
Mr. Gibson's daughter, as our guide. About one-half of a mile from Mr.
Gibson's residence, was a large rock, the top several feet above the
ground. Mr. Gibson had a chamber cut into this rock, in which he had
deposited a Book of Mormon, and other things, and called it the corner
stone of a great temple, which would be erected there. A frame work of
poles had been constructed, in a circular form around this rock, and
this was covered with brush.

Mr. Gibson, by appealing to the pagan superstitions of the natives,
made them believe that this spot was sacred, and if any person touched
it, he would be struck dead.

So much faith had the daughter of Mr. Gibson in the teachings of her
father, that she related, apparently in good faith, the circumstance of
a hen flying upon the boothe, and immediately falling down dead.

Notwithstanding the protest of Miss Gibson, that it was very dangerous
to do so, we went inside of the brush structure, and examined the rock
and came out unharmed.

We were further informed that Mr. Gibson had succeeded in surrounding
his own person and residence with such a halo of sacredness in the
minds of the natives, that they always entered his house on their hands
and knees.

This was repeated on other occasions. It was the old customary way,
in which the natives had been in the habit of paying respect to their
kings, and the custom had been revived by Mr. Gibson, in order to
increase his personal prestige.

We had previously learned that the Saints would assemble in conference
on the 6th of April. At ten o'clock, a. m., they had assembled in the
meeting house. We all started to go in, when Mr. Gibson made some
excuse for returning to his house. We went and took our seats on the
stand. The house was well filled. In a few minutes Mr. Gibson made his
appearance. As soon as he entered the door, the entire congregation
instantly arose to their feet, and remained standing until he was
seated on the stand. The execution of this act of reverence evinced
long and careful training.

Mr. Gibson had, doubtless, delayed his entrance, to make a fitting
opportunity for this exhibition. He entirely ignored the presence of
the Apostles, and, after the people were seated, arose and gave out the
opening hymn. This act gave evidence, at once, that he had no proper
idea of the organization and authority of the Priesthood. Seeing this,
President Benson called on me to pray.

Without giving any time for consultation, as soon as the second hymn
was sung, Mr. Gibson arose to his feet and commenced to address the
congregation, in substance as follows: "My dear red-skinned brethren,
sisters and friends, I presume you are all wondering, and anxious to
know why these strangers have come so suddenly among us, without giving
us any notice of their coming. I will assure you of one thing, my
red-skinned friends, when I find out, I will be sure to let you know,
for I am your father, and will protect you in your rights.

"These strangers may say they are your friends, but let me remind
you how, when they lived here, years ago, they lived upon your very
scanty substance. Did they make any such improvements as you see I have
made? Did I not come here and find you without a father, poor, and
discouraged? Did I not gather you together here, and make all these
improvements that you to-day enjoy?

"Now, you, my red-skinned friends, must decide who your friend and
father is; whether it is these strangers, or I, who have done so much
for you."

When he took his seat, President Benson requested Brother Joseph F.
Smith to talk, rather intimating that it was desirable to speak on
general principles, and that he need not feel bound to notice all that
Mr. Gibson had said.

It seemed impossible for any man to speak with greater power and
demonstration of the Spirit. He referred the Saints to the labors of
Brother George Q. Cannon, and the first Elders who brought them the
gospel.

He reminded them of facts with which the older Saints were well
acquainted--the great disadvantage the Elders labored under, and the
privations they suffered in first preaching the gospel on the islands.
How they slept in their then miserable huts, and lived as they lived;
how they traveled on foot, in storms, and in bad weather, from village
to village, and from house to house, exposing health and life; how they
went destitute of clothing, and what they had been in the habit of
considering the necessaries of life, to bring them the blessings of the
gospel, without money and without price.

He asked by what right Mr. Gibson called himself the father of the
people, and the Elders who faithfully labored to establish them in the
gospel strangers.

The spirit and power that accompanied Brother Smith's remarks
astonished the Saints and opened their eyes. They began to see how
they had been imposed upon. Every word he spoke found a response in
their hearts, as was plainly manifest by their eager looks and animated
countenances.

There was another meeting in the afternoon, in which Apostles Benson
and Snow addressed the Saints. Their remarks were interpreted by Elder
Joseph F. Smith.

On the 7th, there was a meeting in the forenoon. A Priesthood meeting
was appointed for the evening, and the conference adjourned _sine die_.

The meeting of the Priesthood in the evening was well attended, as it
was understood that Mr. Gibson's course would be investigated. The
complaints that were made by the native Elders, in the communication
that led to our present mission, were read, and Mr. Gibson was called
on to make answer to the charges.

In addition to nearly a repetition of his harangue at the meeting on
the day previous, his reply consisted of a bombastic display of some
letters of appointment, and recommendations from President Young, to
which he attached large seals, bedecked with a variety of colored
ribbons, to give them an air of importance, and official significance,
in the eyes of the unsophisticated natives.

These papers he held up before the people, and, pointing to them said,
with great emphasis, "Here is my authority, which I received direct
from President Brigham Young. I don't hold myself accountable to these
men!" meaning the Apostles and those who came with them.

Had there been no other proof of the wrong course of Mr. Gibson, that
remark was sufficient to satisfy the brethren what their plain duty
was, and they acted promptly in the matter.

Apostle E. T. Benson followed Mr. Gibson. He reviewed Mr. Gibson's past
course, and showed that, in making merchandise of the offices of the
Priesthood, introducing the former pagan superstitions of the people,
for the purpose of obtaining power, and his idea of establishing a
temporal and independent kingdom on the Pacific isles, were all in
antagonism to the plan laid down in the gospel for the redemption of
man. The spirit manifested by Mr. Gibson proved that he was ignorant
of the powers of the Priesthood, or that he ignored them for purely
selfish motives. What they had seen and heard since their arrival,
proved that the complaints made by the native Elders, in their letters
to Utah, were correct, as far as they went, but the half had not been
told.

Brother Benson's remarks were interpreted, after which, it was motioned
that Mr. Gibson's course be disapproved. When this was put to a vote,
all but one of the native Elders voted against the motion. This showed
that Mr. Gibson still retained a strong hold on the minds of the Saints.

Notwithstanding this show of strong opposition, Brother Snow arose, and
in his remarks prophesied that Mr. Gibson would see the time that not
one of the Saints would remain with him.

Brother Joseph F. Smith remarked, that, among the scores of Elders who
had labored on the islands, none had been so utterly wanting in the
spirit and power of the gospel as to charge the Saints anything for
conferring on them the blessings of the Priesthood, until Walter M.
Gibson came, and had the presumption to claim that he had a right to
ordain apostles and high priests, for a price--for money.

The Apostles informed Mr. Gibson and the Saints that, when they left
the islands for home, Elder Joseph F. Smith would be left in charge
of the mission. That all those who wished to be considered in good
standing in the Church should leave Lanai and return to their homes on
the other islands, where the branches would be reorganized and set in
order by the brethren who would be left for that purpose.

The next day we returned to Lahaina, where we held a council and cut
Mr. Gibson off from the Church. We returned to Honolulu, and, about
eight days after, Apostles Snow and Benson took passage on the bark
_Onward_, for San Francisco.

Brother Snow's prophecy was literally fulfilled. The Saints all left
Mr. Gibson and returned to their former homes, as they had been
counseled to do. The last one to leave him was Kailihune, the Elder who
had been left to preside over the place of gathering on Lanai.

He finally rejoined the Church. All the plans of Mr. Gibson were
completely frustrated. He is a prominent example of the nothingness of
man, when he attempts to battle against the kingdom of God.

When the Elders were called home, in 1858, there had not been time
to do much in gathering the Saints. As Mr. Gibson had succeeded in
obtaining a personal title to the land leased for that purpose, on
the island of Lanai, brothers Benson and Snow advised the Elders who
remained, to notice in their travels what appeared to them the best
places for this purpose, that, when the time came for it, a good
selection might be made.

On the island of Oahu, and near the sea shore, lived a white man by the
name of Doharty. He did not belong to the Church, but was friendly to
the Saints, and the Elders frequently shared his hospitality. Between
his house and the sea beach was a piece of ground, where grew a very
dense thicket of a large shrub of a peculiar growth. Through this were
paths made by the people and their domestic animals. Into this thicket
the Elders when there were in the habit of daily retiring to pray.
One day when I was walking along one of these paths, I saw President
Young approach me. Said he "This is the place to gather the native
Saints to." He seemed to fully comprehend the surroundings, and in that
easy, familiar way, so characteristic of him, indicated the advantages
afforded for a settlement. No matter what my bodily condition might
have been at that time, the apparent meeting was in the open air and
the broad light of day. It was as real to me as any fact of my life.
I saw the facilities of the place as he represented them, and ever
afterwards, that appeared to me the best place on the islands for the
gathering of the Saints.

We remained on the islands about six months before other Elders arrived
from Utah, and we were released to return home. When we arrived in
San Francisco, we met Elders F. A. Hammond, and George Nebeker, on
their way to the Sandwich Islands. They had instructions to visit, and
carefully examine all the islands, and make the best possible location
that could be made available, to establish a place for the gathering of
the Saints.

I was afterwards informed, that they faithfully carried out their
instructions, and at last decided that the place to which I have
referred on the island of Oahu, was the best for the purpose. It was
purchased, and many of the Saints are now gathered there.

They have an extensive sugar plantation, where labor is provided for
them, and every possible facility is afforded for their advancement.



A PROPHECY FULFILLED.

AN INCIDENT OF MISSIONARY EXPERIENCE.

BY B. F. JOHNSON.

CALLED ON A MISSION TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS--JOURNEY BY THE
SOUTHERN ROUTE--A PROPHECY--FEAR AFTER UTTERING IT--RESIDENCE
IN HONOLULU--POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS CONFLICT--THE KINGDOM IN
JEOPARDY--DISSATISFACTION AMONG THE PEOPLE--LETTER TO THE KING
FAVORABLY CONSIDERED--A DREAM--A PRINCE SENT BY THE KING TO ASK COUNSEL
OF LATTER-DAY SAINT ELDERS--ADVICE ACCEPTED, AND THE KINGDOM SAVED--THE
DREAM AND PROPHECY FULFILED TOGETHER.

With eight other Elders I was called by the General October Conference
of 1852, on a mission to the Sandwich Islands. We went by what was then
known as the Southern route to California, in order to sail from San
Francisco.

In passing through the southern settlements of Utah, we were everywhere
treated with kindness and respect. We were often invited to preach
where we stopped for the night, or to spend the Sabbath. We were in
company with many other Elders who were called to go on missions to
China, Australia, Hindostan, Ceylon, and other places.

We all, alike, took part in the meetings, and shared the hospitality of
the Saints. At Parowan we had an unusually good time, in a meeting of
the Saints. The Spirit of the Lord rested greatly upon both hearers and
speakers.

I was the last Elder called upon to speak, and only a few minutes were
left for me to occupy. Being full of the good feeling and spirit of the
meeting, I commenced, not only to bear my testimony to the truth, but
to prophesy of the future of some of the sons of Zion who were then
going forth as her ministers.

I predicted that, through faithfulness, the wisdom of heaven would
increase with us; that while the wicked became weaker, the Elders of
Israel would grow wiser; that the nations of the earth would begin to
look towards Zion for counselors and statesmen, and that, if the Elders
now going forth to the ends of the earth were true to their calling,
they would not all fill their missions until some of them would be
called upon to give counsel to some of the rulers of the lands to which
they were sent.

After closing my prophecy and remarks, and I had time to ponder on what
I had said, I began to doubt the possibility of my predictions being
fulfilled, and began to be troubled in mind.

For a time I could not divest myself of the feeling, that my prediction
was ill-timed and not by the spirit of the gospel. I would sometimes
query if the brethren did not regard me as a false prophet, or, at
least, as an enthusiast.

When we arrived on the Sandwich Islands, we found the work of the
Lord progressing. The Elders who had been laboring there were greatly
rejoiced to see us.

After a general mission conference, most of the brethren left Honolulu
for their fields of labor on the different islands. I was left at this
capital city, in charge of the foreign interests of the mission, to
preside over a small branch of Saints, which had been gathered from
the foreign residents on the islands, and to preach to the people as
I might find opportunity. I also assisted Elders Lewis and Cannon, in
raising funds for publishing the Book of Mormon in the native language.

Owing to the conflicting interests of political and religious parties
in the Hawaiian kingdom, it was in a weak condition. The various
missionary interests had nearly changed into political ones. Dr. Judd,
one of the missionaries sent out by the American Board of Foreign
Missions, had long been the king's prime minister. Another missionary,
by the name of Armstrong, was Minister of Public Instruction, and other
Americans filled the offices of Minister of Foreign Relations, Chief
Justice, Attorney General, etc.

This missionary-political power began to cause great jealousy,
especially in the case of Dr. Judd. Through his political advantages he
had acquired much wealth, and, apparently by its use, raised himself up
to be a power behind the throne, greater than the throne itself.

King Kamehameha III., like George the III., of England, had not reached
a high standard of virtue, or political economy. It was said that, for
money borrowed of Dr. Judd, he had given a mortgage on the royal palace.

As he had no children of his own he had adopted as next in succession,
two sons of his sister, who were princes of the realm. About this
time two projects were deeply agitating the public mind. One was the
annexation of the islands to the United States, the other, a British
protectorate over them. Neither of these projects suited the interests
of the young princes, or pleased the majority of the people.

There appeared to be but one thing upon which nearly all the
natives could agree, that was opposition to Dr. Judd as the king's
prime minister. He was, of course, sustained by some of his fellow
missionaries, but appeared to be detested by the majority of those
around him. Petition after petition was sent to the king, asking for,
and even demanding, his removal. The court house and other large halls
were crowded with indignation meetings, to protest against his being
retained in office.

It seemed, at times, as though the people would break out in tumult and
insurrection, yet the king made no move to give them satisfaction, and,
for many days, no answer was given to their petitions.

All this time I had been a careful observer, and had attended their
meetings. I had previously written a lengthy letter to the king,
explaining the gospel as now revealed and the object of our mission to
the islands.

This letter he had caused to be published in the government journal,
both in the English and Hawaiian languages. Such was the impression
the reading of it made on his mind, that he sent, through the Minister
of Foreign Relations, to say that he would give us an audience at his
earliest convenience. Up to the time of which I am writing, he had not
found the convenient opportunity.

In the midst of this political commotion, I, one night, dreamed that
I stood upon an eminence near a large mountain. I saw below me upon
the bank of a small, but rapid stream, a large and rudely constructed
frame building, apparently designed for machinery. It was not yet fully
enclosed.

As I looked, I saw a dense smoke arise from the building, and heard the
cry of fire from a large number of people.

It seemed that the wind blew strong from the mountain towards the
building. The people came up on the opposite side of the building,
to put out the fire, and they were blinded by the smoke which blew
in their faces. I thought how foolish they were, to thus stay on the
opposite side from the wind, to be blinded with the smoke.

Looking, I saw a bucket with a rope attached on a flume through which
the water ran. I quickly took it up, drew it full of water, looked for
the center of the fire, dashed it in, and, all at once, the flame was
extinguished.

I thought a multitude of people came crowding into the building,
wondering by whom the fire had been extinguished. Although I was with
them, they appeared to comprehend nothing of my agency in the matter.
I thought they were almost wild with joy, that the building, although
somewhat charred and damaged, had been saved. They calculated that the
damage the building had sustained was about fifty thousand dollars.

I awoke in the morning, strangely impressed with the dream. I related
it to Brother Nathan Tanner, who was then with me. I told him I thought
we should see its interpretation.

That morning, Brother Tanner called on one of the native Saints, who
was living with Halalea, one of the highest native chiefs. He was
a special friend of, and a counselor to, the king, and the man who
carried him my letter.

He told Brother Tanner that the king had appointed him to come with
Prince Rehoreho, to meet us that night at our rooms, lay before us the
king's great political trouble, and get our counsel.

It came plainly to me, then, that therein would be the fulfillment
of my dream. About ten o'clock the same evening, they called on us.
They said the king was greatly exercised in his mind over the troubled
condition of his government, and that he was not decided as to what was
best to do.

He said that he could not trust to the counsel of his ministers, nor to
the advice of the ministers of other nations then at his court, for all
had some point to gain. Dr. Judd, in his past troubles, had been his
adviser, and, in times of need, had supplied him with money.

It pained him, then, to turn out of office one who had so long been his
friend, and, upon this subject, he wished us to give him our wisest
counsel.

While Halalea and the prince were delivering their message, I was
continually praying in my heart that the Lord would give us wisdom to
say such things as would do honor to His cause, for I felt very small
for such an important occasion.

After they delivered the king's message in full, I arose and told
them that we were not sent to meddle with governments, nor to teach
political science, but to preach the gospel of Christ as now revealed.
But, inasmuch as the king was our friend, and desired counsel of us, we
would give him such as the Lord would put in our hearts.

I told them the Bible said, that "when the wicked rule the people
mourn;" that if Dr. Judd was really a good man and a true friend to
the king, as the king had believed him to be, he would not now allow
the king to be in such great trouble on his account, but, like a true
friend, would resign his office for the sake of peace between the king
and his subjects.

The fact that he was disposed to hold on to his office, at the
expense of peace to the king's realm, showed, conclusively, that he
was influenced by other motives than the peace and welfare of the
kingdom. "We feel," said I, "that the present great political trouble
and mourning is owing to Dr. Judd not being a good man, but wickedly
holding a grasp upon the government office against the wishes of the
people, for which there is no necessity, as the king has many true
subjects of more than equal ability, any one of whom he could appoint
as Dr. Judd's successor."

When I ceased speaking, the king's messengers clasped my hands and
said: "The things you have told us we had not thought of, and they are
true. The king will be glad when we tell him what you have said, for
we can see it plainly, now. We will assure you that, at ten o'clock
to-morrow, you will hear the king's herald proclaiming through the
streets of the city that Dr. Judd is removed from office."

They left us with the warmest feelings of gratitude and friendship.

The next morning at ten o'clock, the heralds were heard proclaiming the
dismissal of Dr. Judd. The news created wonder and astonishment among
the people, and they hurried together with public demonstrations of
joy. They greatly marveled and queried by what agency, or through whose
influence this long delayed, though most desirable object had been
attained.

As I had dreamed, so I saw the people greatly rejoicing, and, although
I was daily among them, they had no thought that a Latter-day Saint
could have had any agency in so important a matter.

At night the city was brilliantly illuminated. There were few windows
in it that did not have, at least, one candle to each pane of glass.

In a settlement with Dr. Judd, as I had dreamed, the government found
that it had lost fifty thousand dollars.

Thus my prophecy and my dream were fulfilled together, and peace
returned to the people. Joy came to our hearts that the Lord, through
the inspiration of His Holy Spirit, had made us, His humble Elders, the
means of giving saving counsel to princes.



SPECIAL PROVIDENCES.

CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH THE EARLY TEMPLES WERE BUILT--HOW THE WORKMEN
WERE ENCOURAGED--ARRIVAL OF BROTHER L--IN NAUVOO--HIS WILLINGNESS TO
WORK WITHOUT PAY--HIS EXTREME WANT--APPEALS TO GOD FOR HELP--MONEY
MIRACULOUSLY PROVIDED--PRAYER FOR FOOD ANSWERED--PROVIDENTIAL FINDING
OF A PAIR OF SHOES ON THE PLAINS--A CRIPPLED SHOULDER RESTORED WHILE
DEFENDING THE CHARACTER OF JOSEPH SMITH.

If a record had been kept of all the facts connected with the building
of the Kirtland and Nauvoo Temples, it would tell a curious story of
poverty, self-denial, dependence upon God and wants providentially
supplied.

No doubt such a record has been kept, but not here on earth. We have
not access to it. But many, very many of those who had the privilege
of aiding in the work of building those temples have gone to meet that
record. Some doubtless will meet it with satisfaction, with joy untold;
others with remorse and self-reproach.

Could the Saints of the present day peruse that record, it would put
many of them to the blush to think they had done so little in aid of
such works. They would see that, though they have enjoyed peace and
plenty, they have done almost nothing towards the temples in our day,
compared with what the poor Saints did in building those earlier houses
of God.

The Kirtland Temple was built when the Saints were few in number and
in great poverty, and though comparatively small in size, the erection
of such a building by the tithes and voluntary donations of those who
were faithful, was a very great undertaking. That it was finished in
so short a time was remarkable, and this fact speaks volumes for the
devotion of the Saints of that early day.

When the Nauvoo Temple was commenced, the Saints had increased
considerably in numbers, but were, as a rule, even poorer than in the
days of Kirtland. They had been persecuted by their enemies, driven
from their homes and plundered of their property. Finding a temporary
rest in a bend of the Mississippi river, a locality noted for its
insalubrity, they had struggled in the midst of malarial sickness and
severe privations to establish new homes, and had only just begun to
gather a few comforts around them when they were required by revelation
from the Lord to build a temple to His name.

Upon that temple, many of the Saints labored month after month, with
an energy and interest that only religious zeal can impart. They had
learned something of the use and importance of temples, before that
building was commenced, but as the work advanced more light was given
them from time to time. The Prophet of God would visit the workmen and
instruct and encourage them in their labors personally, frequently
pronouncing blessings upon their heads for their diligence and
faithfulness, and when persecution became so strong that he was obliged
to hide from his enemies, he sent the written word to stimulate them in
their labors, and explained the doctrine of baptism for the dead, then
newly revealed.

While living thus in seclusion, he wrote to the Saints in Nauvoo, on
the 1st of September, 1842: "And again, verily thus saith the Lord,
let the work of my temple, and all the works which I have appointed
unto you, be continued on and not cease; and let your diligence, and
your perseverance, and patience, and your works be redoubled, and you
shall in nowise lose your reward, saith the Lord of hosts. And if they
persecute you, so persecuted they the prophets and righteous men that
were before you. For all this there is a reward in heaven."

Again, on the 6th of the same month, he wrote additional words of
encouragement, unfolding still farther that glorious saving principle
as it had been revealed to him, and roused the workmen to action by
this stirring appeal: "Brethren, shall we not go on in so great a
cause? Go forward and not backward. Courage, brethren; and on, on to
the victory! Let your hearts rejoice, and be exceeding glad. Let the
earth break forth into singing. Let the dead speak forth anthems of
eternal praise to the King Immanuel, who hath ordained before the world
was, that which would enable us to redeem them out of their prison; for
the prisoners shall go free."

Being thus encouraged, and knowing that the time allowed for building
the house was limited, the men worked with a will and determination
that made success certain. Though they had to stand guard at night to
prevent their enemies from surprising the city during the darkness and
slaying its defenseless inhabitants, they did not cease their exertions
during the daytime to erect the house of God. Though they went on
short rations till some of them actually fainted beside their work,
from sheer hunger and exhaustion, still they persevered. Though the
mechanics employed upon the temple had tempting offers of abundant work
and ready pay if they would go outside of Nauvoo and labor, many of
them preferred to remain and work without pecuniary reward in rearing
that sacred structure.

The case of one of those workmen will serve to illustrate the
self-sacrificing disposition manifested by many of those who labored
upon that building, as well as the way their simple wants were
sometimes supplied by the Almighty.

Brother L--arrived in Nauvoo from England, his native country, in
March, 1844. He was an excellent mechanic, had held good situations and
been in good circumstances in the "old country," and his skill as a
workman was such as to command ready employment and high wages in any
of the large cities of America, had such been his object.

But he had embraced the gospel and received a testimony of its truth,
and afterwards the spirit of gathering with the Saints, which enabled
him to brook the taunts and ridicule heaped upon him by friends and
relatives for his unpopular faith, and resist the pleading of aged
parents, who were loath to part with him.

His faith and zeal were such that he had left friends and property and
all that he had formerly held dear, and come to America that he might
be with the chosen people of God and assist in building up Zion.

He was ambitious to labor upon the temple, and applied for work
immediately upon his arrival in Nauvoo. When informed that there was
plenty of work but nothing to pay with, he replied that pay was no
consideration.

He took hold with a determination, and worked with all the energy with
which the young, strong and enthusiastic nature was capable from that
time until the work upon the temple ceased, upwards of two years, and
during that time only received in cash for his services the small
amount of fifty cents.

Many a time he felt the pangs of hunger, and went to his work fasting
rather than join with his family in eating the last ration of food in
their possession, but the Lord sustained him by His Spirit, gave him
joy in his labors and provided a way for more food to be obtained to
sustain the lives of himself and family.

He and his young wife had a habit of appealing to the Almighty in
prayer when in an extremity, and they invariably found comfort in so
doing, and generally had their prayers answered.

Upon one occasion, their infant child was dangerously sick, and they
felt the want of twenty-five cents to procure some medicine with. Where
to get it they did not know, and so, as usual, they prayed to the Lord
to open their way to obtain it. They felt an assurance on arising from
their knees that their prayer would be answered, but they knew not
how. Soon afterwards the husband happened to feel some hard substance
in the waistband of his pants, and called his wife's attention to it,
wondering what it could be. The pants were almost new. They had been
made to order for him only a short time before. There was no hole
in the band, and it seemed that, whatever it was, it must have been
inserted between the pieces of cloth when the pants were being made,
and yet he thought it strange that he had not discovered it before.

To solve the mystery, a few stitches were cut, and the waistband
opened, when, lo! there were two new ten cent pieces and one five cent
piece--just the amount of money they required to buy medicine with.

Lest the money might have been lost by the tailor who made the pants, a
very poor man who lived neighbor to them, he took it to him and asked
him, but that impecunious individual said he knew it could not be his,
for he had never had a cent of money in his possession for months.

They accepted it as a gift from the Lord, bought the medicine their
child needed and he was soon well.

When the work on the temple was nearing completion, the food supply for
the family became entirely exhausted, and there seemed no prospect of
obtaining any more without quitting the work on the temple and going
elsewhere for employment. That, of course, Brother L--was averse to
doing, and in this, as in other cases of extremity, he and his wife
retired to their bedroom to lay the matter before the Lord. They had
scarcely finished their prayer when a knock was heard at the door. On
opening it, they found a man there who said he desired a particular job
of work done, which he did not feel like entrusting to anyone else but
Brother L--. However, he was in no particular hurry for it, it need
not be done till the work on the temple was completed, but he wanted
to arrange and pay for it then, as he was going on a foreign mission.
"But," said he, "I have nothing to pay you for it but wheat; can you
use that?"

It was the very thing the family stood most in need of; it was
gratefully accepted and regarded as a direct answer to their prayer,
and within a short time the wheat was ground and a good supply of flour
returned from it.

When the Saints were preparing to leave Nauvoo, wagons for the journey
were in great demand, and every person among them who had ever worked
at wagon-making, and very many also who never had, set to work making
them. Good timber was tolerably plentiful, but iron cost cash, and that
was a scarce article. All sorts of nonedescript vehicles were hastily
improvised, many of them so rude in their construction as to put the
veriest bungler of a wheelwright to the blush for their appearance. Yet
under the blessing of God they did good service. Some of them, for the
want of iron, were made almost entirely of wood. In some extreme cases
they were even made without the usual iron tires, strips of rawhide
being nailed on the felloes as a substitute. One, at least, of the
wagons made in this fashion stood the trip across the plains, and was
used for several years after its arrival in Salt Lake Valley.

Brother L--had been fortunate enough to get the wood work of a wagon
made, but how to procure the iron was a question which greatly
perplexed him. However, he knew that he was engaged in the Lord's
service, and he felt that he had a claim upon His mercy and blessings.
Accordingly, he and his wife made their want a subject of earnest
prayer, and then went on about their duties, trusting in the Lord to
answer their petition.

Soon afterwards Brother L--had occasion to go out on the prairie in
search of his cow, which had strayed off, and during his absence
encountered a drenching shower, so that when he returned home he found
it necessary to change his clothing. He hung his wet clothes before
a fire in the open fireplace to dry, and as he did so a bright gold
sovereign, a ten and a five cent piece dropped to the floor, apparently
from his pocket. He knew, however, that he had no money previously, and
he could account for its presence there only by its having been sent by
the Lord. It was the exact amount required to purchase the iron for his
wagon, and it was soon obtained and the wagon finished.

With such manifestations as these of God's goodness, he was encouraged
to continue in his labors upon the temple of God, and when it was so
far completed that the holy ordinances for which it was designed could
be performed in it, he felt repaid in the blessings which he therein
received for all his efforts towards its construction.

A rather remarkable case of special providence occurred when Brother
L--was crossing the plains, coming to Salt Lake Valley. His shoes gave
out, and his feet became very sore from having to walk so much while
driving his ox-team, etc. Early one morning, when he, in company with
another brother, were out hunting for their cattle, he exclaimed to his
companion as he limped and hobbled over the rocky ground, "Oh! I do
wish the Lord would send me a pair of shoes!"

He had not walked many rods after expressing this wish when he saw
something lying a short distance ahead of him, and called the attention
of his companion to it, who remarked that it must be the bell and strap
lost off one of the oxen, but to the inexpressible joy of Brother L--,
he found, on approaching the object, that it was a new pair of shoes,
which had evidently never been worn, and which he found, on trying them
on, to fit him as well as if they had been made for him. He thanked the
Lord for them, for he felt that it was through His merciful providence
that they had been left there, and went on his way rejoicing. The shoes
did him good service.

While alluding to Brother L--, another incident may be related from his
experience to illustrate the manner in which the Almighty sustains and
blesses those who are valiant in defending His cause and the character
of His anointed servants.

At an early period in the settlement of Salt Lake Valley, Brother
L--had a severe attack of inflammatory rheumatism and bilious fever,
from which he suffered a long time, and which drew his shoulder out of
place and left him in a very helpless condition. He was in that fix
for about six months--able to walk about, but unable to make any use
whatever of one arm. He could not even dress himself. Surgeons examined
his shoulder, and assured him that it was out of joint, and urged him
to have it set. He, however, declined accepting their advice, as he had
faith that the Lord would make him whole in answer to his prayer.

Living neighbor to him in Salt Lake City, and holding an office to
which he had been appointed by the vote of the members of the Ward, was
a man by the name of Gallup, who was a rank apostate at heart, although
he had a standing in the Church.

In conversation with Brother L--one day, this man Gallup advocated the
doctrines of a certain man named Cladden Bishop, who had once belonged
to the Church but who had apostatized and attempted to start a church
of his own.

Brother L--became so disgusted with his false reasoning and bitter,
malignant spirit that he went to the Bishop of the Ward and made
complaint about such a man as Gallup being allowed to hold an office in
the Ward or even a membership in the Church.

The result was, a Priesthood meeting was called and Mr. Gallup was
cited to appear and state his views upon the subject of religion.

In the course of his speech he declared: "Joseph Smith was a wicked and
adulterous man; he ate and drank with the drunkard, his lot was cast
with the hypocrite and unbeliever, and he has gone to hell."

This was too much for Brother L--to stand, even in his crippled
condition. He could not tamely submit to hear the character of a man
assailed whom he loved dearer than his life. Jumping to his feet and
springing over the benches that stood between him and Mr. Gallup, he
made for him with the intention of administering summary vengeance.
Several persons immediately interposed to prevent him from inflicting
any bodily injury upon Gallup, and it was noticed that he made use
of his crippled arm, and when the excitement subsided he discovered
himself that his shoulder had assumed its natural position and that he
was as well as he ever had been.

Gallup, of course, was cut off from the Church, and thought himself
fortunate, no doubt, in escaping a castigation, and Brother L--went
home rejoicing, and entered his house swinging his arm which had been
so long useless and shouting for joy, while his wife wept tears of
gratitude for the goodness of God in bringing about his restoration to
health and soundness.




INCIDENTS ON THE PLAINS.

BY A. M. C.

CHAPTER I.

ARMY SENT TO UTAH--MISSIONARIES CALLED HOME--LARGE NUMBER ASSEMBLE
AT FLORENCE--DANGERS OF THE TRIP--COUNCIL TO DECIDE UPON COURSE OF
ACTION--FORTUNATE FOG--PROVIDENTIAL STORM.

IN 1857, James Buchanan, who was then President of the United States,
sent an army to this Territory, for the purpose, it was said, of
punishing the "Mormons" for breaking the laws and doing violence to the
Judges who had been sent here.

This was the excuse given for the army being sent; but the people of
the Territory had not violated the laws nor done any injury to any of
the officers of the Government; they were then, as they ever have been,
peaceable and law abiding.

The real object for sending the troops here, was to crush out what the
world called "Mormonism."

The principal men who urged the sending of troops here, were traitors
in their hearts against the Government, and they hoped by taking these
steps to divert the attention of the country from their own wicked
schemes; and also to get the army of the United States out of the way
by having it sent to this distant region. By accomplishing this, they
thought they could operate to advantage in bringing about their own
designs.

The army was kept out at Fort Bridger all that winter and many of the
officers and soldiers were very angry because they could not come into
our cities and enjoy themselves at our expense.

When it was found that the army was marching here, and there was likely
to be trouble, the Elders in Europe and in the United States were
re-called; but feelings ran so high in the United States against our
people that it was somewhat dangerous for a man to travel and be known
as a Mormon. On the plains there were men on the watch for every one
bearing the name of Latter-day Saint.

It was under these circumstances that the Elders assembled at the
frontiers to return home. One hundred and ten of them crossed the
Missouri river in the beginning of May, 1858, at the point formerly
known as Winter Quarters; at present it is called Florence.

They were anxious to get home, some of them having been absent a year
and others for three or four years.

There were, in reality, two companies; one composed of Elders returning
from the United States and Canada, Elder David Brinton being their
captain, and the Elders returning from Europe, who had Elder John W.
Berry as their captain. It was deemed advisable, however, in view of
the troubled and uncertain state of affairs, for both companies to
travel together.

The writer was in the company of Elders returning from the United
States, where he had been on a mission for upwards of three years.

We had heard of several of our brethren being taken by the army and
held under threats, and we knew not what our fate would be were the
soldiers to get us in their power; for they accused every Latter-day
Saint of treachery to the Government while they themselves were in
reality the traitors as the subsequent careers of many of them fully
proved.

Many thought that, as the roads were all blocked, and carefully watched
by the troops, when we came in the vicinity of the army we would be
under the necessity of burning or abandoning our wagons and everything
that we could not pack on our animals.

Among the brethren was a man whose name was Pope; he had a wife and
two or three small children. They were very anxious to accompany us,
and, although the perils we were about to encounter were of a serious
nature, they could not be induced by anything that could be said to
them to remain behind. A council of the Elders was held upon their
case, and it was agreed to permit Brother Pope to accompany us, as well
as four brethren who proposed walking the entire distance to the Valley.

It was a time that required faith to be exercised, for the affairs of
the Saints were in a critical condition. We knew, however, that God had
delivered us when we had relied upon Him, and we united with great zeal
in imploring His blessing, that He might overrule everything in such a
manner that we could return in safety to the society of our families
and friends.

After leaving Winter Quarters we traveled on without interruption until
we drew near to Fort Kearny. Our road was on the north side of the
Platte, and Fort Kearney was on the south side. There were troops at
the Fort and they were on the alert to prevent companies of men or any
kind of aid passing over the road to help the "Mormons" in Utah; for
they pretended to look upon our people as public enemies.

It was our custom at such times to hold a council, and take into
consideration the best course to pursue. The Elders all came together
and we prayed to the Lord, and asked Him to bestow upon us His Holy
Spirit and to lead and guide us in our operations. When we unitedly
decided in council upon pursuing a certain course we always felt that
that was the mind and will of the Lord unto us.

It was decided at this council that we should avoid attracting the
attention of the people of the Fort by passing it in the night.

Unfortunately, as it seemed at the time, it rained heavily that evening
and we were only able to travel until a little past midnight. By that
time ourselves and our animals were so thoroughly fatigued and the
night was so dark that we were compelled to stop and tie up for the
night.

Our reflections were not very pleasant, because we felt sure that when
morning dawned upon us we would be in full sight of the fort, and
undoubtedly would receive a visit from the officers and troops.

We awoke with the dawn of day, and instead of being able to see
the fort, or its occupants being able to see us, we found our camp
enveloped in a fog, the mist being so dense that it was with difficulty
we could see each other. We traveled on in the fog until afternoon, by
which time we were out of sight of the fort.

After leaving this point we had plenty of game, buffalo, antelope,
etc., and we were able to obtain an abundance of fresh meat, which made
this part of the journey exceedingly pleasant; for though in an Indian
country, we had not the fear of the wild and savage red men that we had
of those of our own color, who professed to be the loyal citizens of
our government.

As we approached the junction of the North and South Platte, a herd
of mules passed us. They were being driven in the direction of Fort
Laramie and were traveling at a much faster gait than we were going.
The men who were driving them saw us, and we fully expected they would
carry the intelligence to the fort of our being close by. It was known
that "Mormon" Elders were returning to the Valley, and the military
were prepared to stop them, or to otherwise interfere with them.

When within half a day's travel of Fort Laramie, another council was
called to take into consideration the best course to pursue. We settled
the matter by determining to rest on Sunday, rise early the following
morning and pass the fort in daylight, as we felt satisfied the troops
were informed of our approach by the men who had just passed us.

Monday was a beautiful day; we traveled on without interruption until
we came in sight of the fort, which was about one o'clock, when one of
the severest hailstorms any of us had ever seen broke upon us. The hail
fell so rapidly that our animals could scarcely travel on account of
their feet balling up with it. Our train had been seen from the fort
and parties had started to meet us; but when the storm broke upon them,
they were compelled to retreat to their quarters. The storm was too
severe for them to remain out in it.

I learned afterwards that when the storm ceased a company of men had
been sent from Fort Laramie to overtake us. They followed us as far as
the North Platte bridge, and not being able to reach us at this point,
they deemed it best to return again to the fort. We were not aware of
this at the time; but having traveled leisurely from Kearny to Laramie,
our animals were in much better condition than when we started; and
fearing that the people at Laramie might make some attempt to stop
us, we made forced drives until we reached Independence Rock on the
Sweetwater. Thus the Lord again delivered us from the hands of our
enemies in a most providential manner; for had it not been for this
hailstorm it is altogether likely we would have been stopped.



CHAPTER II.

APOSTATES MET--THE CHAPLAIN SEPARATES FROM THE COMPANY TO MEET SOME
APOSTATES--AN ADVENTUROUS TRIP--DISCHACHARGED GOVERNMENT TEAMSTERS
INDIGNANT AT "MORMONS"--PLOT TO STEAL THE CHAPLAIN'S HORSE--ADVICE TO
THE APOSTATES TO LOOK TO THEIR OWN SAFETY--MR. STOUT'S COMPASSION FOR
THE HATCHET-FACED MISSOURIAN--HOW HIS CONFIDENCE WAS REWARDED--MEET
CAPTAIN HATCH--NEWS OF BUCHANAN'S AMNESTY PROCLAMATION--EVADE THE ARMY,
AND REACH THE VALLEY SAFELY.

At the Three Crossings of the Sweetwater we met a company of apostates,
who were in full retreat from the Valley, unwilling to trust God's
providence to screen them from the wrath of our enemies, and anxious to
get back to the States.

The night following we encamped at the eastern end of what is known as
the Seminole cut-off. The company intended to travel on this cut-off in
the morning.

That evening the chaplain of our company, a young Elder who had a
fondness for adventure, proposed that he should travel on the old
route, for the purpose of meeting a man for whom he had transacted
some business in the States, and who, he was informed, was returning
in a company of apostates. Captains Berry and Brinton thought he ought
not to attempt to go by that route alone; at this, one of the other
Elders volunteered to accompany him. But when morning came the latter
had changed his mind; for it had stormed during the night, snow had
fallen and it still snowed very hard, and he thought the weather too
disagreeable for so lonely a trip.

Mr. Chaplain, however, in opposition to all remonstrances, was resolved
to go, and he started out alone, on horseback, taking with him some
blankets and a few crackers. It was the eleventh day of June--a strange
time, you would think, for snow to fall, yet it continued to descend
until the middle of the afternoon, and was so deep that when he came
to a place on the Sweetwater, called the Rocky Ridge, he was obliged
to dismount and lead his pony. It was a lonely trip which he took, and
through a wild, desolate country; it was with considerable pleasure,
therefore, that he came in sight of the camp which he sought just as
the sun was going down.

It was encamped on what is known as Quaking-Aspen Creek. The man whom
he expected to meet was not in the company; but he found others whom he
had known, persons who did not love the gospel sufficiently to endure
the trials promised to the Saints; but were desirous to return to that
Babylon from which they had been gathered.

When the chaplain rejoined his companions, the Elders, he related
the incidents of this trip and I was permitted to take the following
account from his journal:

    "I had just staked my animal to feed upon the brush in the
    neighborhood of the camp, when a company of discharged Government
    teamsters passed by on their way east, under the guidance of George
    Merrick. On account of the hardships they had endured the previous
    winter, they were very indignant at everybody called "Mormon."
    They had calculated on enjoying themselves at our people's expense
    in the Valley; but instead of that, they had been kept out in the
    mountains all winter, and they were disappointed. An hour later one
    Ephraim Thornton, a young man who, when a boy, in Nauvoo, had been
    a schoolmate of mine, but who was now an apostate, took me aside
    and informed me of a plan which had been arranged to rob me of my
    horse. A discharged Government teamster had sworn to take it, or
    die in the attempt.

    "I thanked Mr. Thornton for the information; but I advised him to
    have the camp look to their own affairs, and I would conduct mine,
    adding that I did not fear that teamster's threats, as 'barking
    dogs seldom bite.'

    "There was one Mr. Stout in this company, with whom I conversed.
    He was bound for the States, and was accompanied by his wife. He
    told me that he had been successful in raising stock in Cedar
    Valley, and had sold them for the gold to the army he had just
    passed at Fort Bridger. He pointed out to me a young hatchet-faced
    Missourian, with long hair and snake-like appearance, whom he
    represented as a Government teamster, a poor fellow for whom he
    felt compassion and whom he was carrying to his home. It was vain
    for me to advise him not to trust Mr. Hatchet-face too far. He had
    confidence in him; I had none; I would not have trusted him out of
    my sight. My views in relation to him received speedy confirmation;
    for while standing with my back to the fire looking in the
    direction of my pony, I heard Mr. Stout swear very hard at his wife
    for leaving the wagon. His sack of gold, amounting to $1.500 had
    disappeared. An investigation revealed the fact that not only was
    the gold missing, but crackers, blankets, several watches and other
    things, besides a race mare belonging to one Joseph Greenwood, were
    all gone, and with them the poor fellow, the Missourian, for whom
    Mr. Stout had felt so much compassion! It afterwards transpired
    that he had been making his arrangements for flight for several
    days. My advice to Mr. Thornton for the camp to look to their own
    affairs was very timely, as this transaction proved.

    "That my horse might not be stolen I made my bed upon the snow,
    holding the bridle in my hand, and my pistols ready for use in my
    belt. But I was undisturbed. I arose in the morning and left the
    camp and its misery to continue my journey towards the home of
    our people. As I left the last crossing of the Sweetwater and was
    ascending the South Pass, I met a company of our brethren, under
    Captain Abram Hatch, going to the North Platte on business. It
    was fortunate that I took this route, for they had word for our
    company which, had I not met them, we would not have received. Upon
    learning where the Elders were, they turned and accompanied me. We
    found the company on the cut-off, five miles from its junction with
    the old road."

Our chaplain seemed happy at rejoining us, and from his wearied looks
and blistered face, we judged he would not soon go again in search of
apostates. But, as he said in his journal, it was fortunate that he
had taken that route. The providence of the Lord was in it, and it was
overruled for our good by his meeting Captain Hatch and companions.
They brought us President Buchanan's amnesty proclamation, which
was read, also the intelligence of our people's move South: also
instructions from President Young to the effect that unless otherwise
instructed, we were to take the Sublet cut-off to the north until we
struck Bear river, and then travel on the trail which would lead us to
the head of Echo Canyon.

From Captain Hatch, also, we learned that it was the intention of Col.
Albert Sidney Johnson, the commander of the army, to leave Fort Bridger
the following Monday for the Valley.

But little remains to be said of our journey home after parting with
Captain Abram Hatch and companions. We had reached the Big Bend on the
Sandy, when we found that we had passed the Sublet cut-off and were
where the Kinney cut-off led north. It was decided in council to travel
on that route.

We soon struck Green river, and as if Providence had arranged affairs
for us, we found a fine ferry boat tied at the river side, upon which
we crossed. We continued to travel by this route from this point
to Bear river, which we crossed in our wagon boxes, there being no
boat, and swam our horses. Bear river not being very wide, we had no
difficulty in crossing by this means.

We came into Echo canyon twelve miles west of Yellow Creek. From
mountaineers whom some of the Elders met, and who were going east with
supplies to meet the army, we learned that Johnson and the army were
encamped that night on Yellow Creek. They also informed the brethren
that a company of two hundred and fifty sappers and miners were ahead
of us, repairing the road and removing obstructions before the advance
of the army.

We overtook this company next morning. Had they suspected that we had
not been seen by the main army, they would very likely have stopped us.
But they had no idea that we had come by any other route, and therefore
after asking us how far back the command was, the order was given,
"Clear the road, boys, and let them pass." From this point we traveled
on until we reached Salt Lake City without meeting any incident worthy
of note.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fragments of Experience, by Various

